**The Jewish Torah: Genesis Unit I (1:1-2:3)**

1:1 In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.  
1:2 The earth was formless and empty, with darkness over the surface of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters.  
1:3 God said, "Let there be light," and there was light.  
1:4 God saw that the light was good, and He separated the light from the darkness.  
1:5 God called the light "day," and the darkness He called "night." There was evening, and there was morning—the first day.

1:14 God said, "Let there be lights in the sky to separate the day from the night, and let them serve as signs to mark seasons, days, and years,  
1:15 and let them be lights in the sky to give light on the earth." And it was so.  
1:16 God made two great lights—the greater light to govern the day and the lesser light to govern the night. He also made the stars.  
1:17 God set them in the sky to give light on the earth,  
1:18 to govern the day and the night, and to separate light from darkness. God saw that it was good.  
1:19 There was evening, and there was morning—the fourth day.

1:6 God said, "Let there be a vault between the waters to separate water from water."  
1:7 So God made the vault and separated the water under the vault from the water above it. And it was so.  
1:8 God called the vault "sky." There was evening, and there was morning—the second day.

1:20 God said, "Let the water teem with living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth across the vault of the sky."  
1:21 So God created the great creatures of the sea and every living thing with which the water teems and that moves about in it, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.  
1:22 God blessed them and said, "Be fruitful and increase in number and fill the water in the seas, and let the birds increase on the earth."  
1:23 There was evening, and there was morning—the fifth day.

1:9 God said, "Let the water under the sky be gathered to one place, and let dry ground appear." And it was so.  
1:10 God called the dry ground "land," and the gathered waters He called "seas." And God saw that it was good.

1:24 God said, "Let the land produce living creatures according to their kinds: the livestock, the creatures that move along the ground, and the wild animals, each according to its kind." And it was so.  
1:25 God made the wild animals according to their kinds, the livestock according to their kinds, and all the creatures that move along the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.

1:11 God said, "Let the land produce vegetation: seed-bearing plants and trees on the land that bear fruit with seed in it, according to their kinds." And it was so.  
1:12 The land produced vegetation: plants bearing seed according to their kinds and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.  
1:13 There was evening, and there was morning—the third day.

1:26 God said, "Let us make mankind in our image, in our likeness, so that they may rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky, over the livestock and all the wild animals, and over all the creatures that move along the ground."  
1:27 So God created mankind in His own image, in the image of God He created them; male and female He created them.  
1:28 God blessed them and said to them, "Be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it. Rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky and over every living creature that moves on the ground."  
1:29 God said, "I give you every seed-bearing plant on the face of the whole earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it. They will be yours for food.  
1:30 And to all the beasts of the earth and all the birds in the sky and all the creatures that move along the ground—everything that has the breath of life in it—I give every green plant for food." And it was so.  
1:31 God saw all that He had made, and it was very good. There was evening, and there was morning—the sixth day.

2:1 Thus the heavens and the earth were completed in all their vast array.  
2:2 By the seventh day, God had finished the work He had been doing; so on the seventh day, He rested from all His work.  
2:3 Then God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it He rested from all the work of creating that He had done.

**Genesis Unit II (2:4-4:26)**

2:4 This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created, when the LORD God made the earth and the heavens.  
2:5 No shrub had yet appeared on the earth and no plant had yet sprung up, for the LORD God had not sent rain on the earth and there was no one to work the ground,  
2:6 but streams came up from the earth and watered the whole surface of the ground.  
2:7 Then the LORD God formed a man from the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living being.

2:18 The LORD God said, "It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a helper suitable for him."  
2:19 Now the LORD God had formed out of the ground all the wild animals and all the birds in the sky. He brought them to the man to see what he would name them; and whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name.  
2:20 So the man gave names to all the livestock, the birds in the sky, and all the wild animals. But for Adam, no suitable helper was found.

2:8 Now the LORD God had planted a garden in the east, in Eden; and there He put the man He had formed.  
2:9 The LORD God made all kinds of trees grow out of the ground—trees that were pleasing to the eye and good for food. In the middle of the garden were the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.  
2:10 A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was separated into four headwaters.  
2:11 The name of the first is the Pishon; it winds through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold.  
2:12 The gold of that land is good; aromatic resin and onyx are also there.  
2:13 The name of the second river is the Gihon; it winds through the entire land of Cush.  
2:14 The name of the third river is the Tigris; it runs along the east side of Ashur. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.  
2:15 The LORD God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it.  
2:16 And the LORD God commanded the man, "You are free to eat from any tree in the garden;  
2:17 but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat from it you will certainly die."

2:21 So the LORD God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep; and while he was sleeping, He took one of the man's ribs and then closed up the place with flesh.  
2:22 Then the LORD God made a woman from the rib He had taken out of the man, and He brought her to the man.  
2:23 The man said, "This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called 'woman,' for she was taken out of man."  
2:24 That is why a man leaves his father and mother and is united to his wife, and they become one flesh.  
2:25 Adam and his wife were both naked, and they felt no shame.

3:1 Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the LORD God had made. He said to the woman, "Did God really say, 'You must not eat from any tree in the garden'?"  
3:2 The woman said to the serpent, "We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden,  
3:3 but God did say, 'You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.'"  
3:4 "You will not certainly die," the serpent said to the woman.  
3:5 "For God knows that when you eat from it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil."  
3:6 When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye, and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She also gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it.  
3:7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were naked; so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves.

4:1 Adam made love to his wife Eve, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Cain. She said, "With the help of the LORD I have brought forth a man."  
4:2 Later she gave birth to his brother Abel. Now Abel kept flocks, and Cain worked the soil.  
4:3 In the course of time, Cain brought some of the fruits of the soil as an offering to the LORD.  
4:4 And Abel also brought an offering—fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock. The LORD looked with favor on Abel and his offering,  
4:5 but on Cain and his offering He did not look with favor. So Cain was very angry, and his face was downcast.  
4:6 Then the LORD said to Cain, "Why are you angry? Why is your face downcast?  
4:7 If you do what is right, will you not be accepted? But if you do not do what is right, sin is crouching at your door; it desires to have you, but you must rule over it."  
4:8 Now Cain said to his brother Abel, "Let's go out to the field." While they were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.

3:8 Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the LORD God as He was walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the LORD God among the trees of the garden.**Genesis Unit II (2:4-4:26)**

2:4 This is the story of the creation of the heavens and the earth when the LORD God made them.  
2:5 No plants or shrubs had yet grown on the earth because the LORD God had not sent rain, and there was no one to cultivate the land.  
2:6 But streams came up from the earth and watered the entire surface of the ground.  
2:7 Then the LORD God formed a man from the dust of the ground and breathed life into his nostrils, making him a living being.

2:18 The LORD God said, "It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a suitable helper for him."  
2:19 The LORD God had formed all the wild animals and birds from the ground. He brought them to the man to see what he would name them, and whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name.  
2:20 The man named all the livestock, birds, and wild animals, but no suitable helper was found for Adam.

2:8 The LORD God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, and placed the man He had formed there.  
2:9 The LORD God made all kinds of trees grow out of the ground—trees that were pleasing to the eye and good for food. In the middle of the garden were the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.  
2:10 A river flowed from Eden to water the garden, and from there it divided into four headwaters.  
2:11 The first river is the Pishon, which winds through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold.  
2:12 The gold of that land is good; aromatic resin and onyx are also there.  
2:13 The second river is the Gihon, which winds through the entire land of Cush.  
2:14 The third river is the Tigris, which runs along the east side of Ashur. The fourth river is the Euphrates.  
2:15 The LORD God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it.  
2:16 And the LORD God commanded the man, "You are free to eat from any tree in the garden;  
2:17 but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat from it you will certainly die."

2:21 So the LORD God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep; and while he was sleeping, He took one of the man's ribs and then closed up the place with flesh.  
2:22 Then the LORD God made a woman from the rib He had taken out of the man, and He brought her to the man.  
2:23 The man said, "This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called 'woman,' for she was taken out of man."  
2:24 That is why a man leaves his father and mother and is united to his wife, and they become one flesh.  
2:25 Adam and his wife were both naked, and they felt no shame.

3:1 Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the LORD God had made. He said to the woman, "Did God really say, 'You must not eat from any tree in the garden'?"  
3:2 The woman said to the serpent, "We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden,  
3:3 but God did say, 'You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.'"  
3:4 "You will not certainly die," the serpent said to the woman.  
3:5 "For God knows that when you eat from it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil."  
3:6 When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye, and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She also gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it.  
3:7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were naked; so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves.

4:1 Adam made love to his wife Eve, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Cain. She said, "With the help of the LORD I have brought forth a man."  
4:2 Later she gave birth to his brother Abel. Now Abel kept flocks, and Cain worked the soil.  
4:3 In the course of time, Cain brought some of the fruits of the soil as an offering to the LORD.  
4:4 And Abel also brought an offering—fat portions from some of the firstborn of his flock. The LORD looked with favor on Abel and his offering,  
4:5 but on Cain and his offering He did not look with favor. So Cain was very angry, and his face was downcast.  
4:6 Then the LORD said to Cain, "Why are you angry? Why is your face downcast?  
4:7 If you do what is right, will you not be accepted? But if you do not do what is right, sin is crouching at your door; it desires to have you, but you must rule over it."  
4:8 Now Cain said to his brother Abel, "Let's go out to the field." While they were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.

3:8 Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the LORD God as He was walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the LORD God among the trees of the garden.  
3:9 But the LORD God called to the man, "Where are you?"  
3:10 He answered, "I heard you in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked; so I hid."  
3:11 And He said, "Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?"  
3:12 The man said, "The woman you put here with me—she gave me some fruit from the tree, and I ate it."  
3:13 Then the LORD God said to the woman, "What is this you have done?"  
The woman said, "The serpent deceived me, and I ate."  
3:14 So the LORD God said to the serpent, "Because you have done this, cursed are you above all livestock and all wild animals! You will crawl on your belly and you will eat dust all the days of your life.  
3:15 And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; he will crush your head, and you will strike his heel."  
3:16 To the woman He said, "I will make your pains in childbearing very severe; with painful labor you will give birth to children. Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you."  
3:17 To Adam He said, "Because you listened to your wife and ate fruit from the tree about which I commanded you, 'You must not eat from it,' cursed is the ground because of you; through painful toil you will eat food from it all the days of your life.  
3:18 It will produce thorns and thistles for you, and you will eat the plants of the field.  
3:19 By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return."  
3:20 Adam named his wife Eve, because she would become the mother of all the living.  
3:21 The LORD God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife and clothed them.  
3:22 And the LORD God said, "The man has now become like one of us, knowing good and evil. He must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat, and live forever."  
3:23 So the LORD God banished him from the Garden of Eden to work the ground from which he had been taken.  
3:24 After He drove the man out, He placed on the east side of the Garden of Eden cherubim and a flaming sword flashing back and forth to guard the way to the tree of life.

4:9 Then the LORD said to Cain, "Where is your brother Abel?"  
"I don't know," he replied. "Am I my brother's keeper?"  
4:10 The LORD said, "What have you done? Listen! Your brother's blood cries out to me from the ground.  
4:11 Now you are under a curse and driven from the ground, which opened its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand.  
4:12 When you work the ground, it will no longer yield its crops for you. You will be a restless wanderer on the earth."  
4:13 Cain said to the LORD, "My punishment is more than I can bear.  
4:14 Today you are driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from your presence; I will be a restless wanderer on the earth, and whoever finds me will kill me."  
4:15 But the LORD said to him, "Not so; anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times over." Then the LORD put a mark on Cain so that no one who found him would kill him.  
4:16 So Cain went out from the LORD's presence and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden.  
4:17 Cain made love to his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch. Cain was then building a city, and he named it after his son Enoch.  
4:18 To Enoch was born Irad, and Irad was the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael was the father of Methushael, and Methushael was the father of Lamech.  
4:19 Lamech married two women, one named Adah and the other Zillah.  
4:20 Adah gave birth to Jabal; he was the father of those who live in tents and raise livestock.  
4:21 His brother's name was Jubal; he was the father of all who play stringed instruments and pipes.  
4:22 Zillah also had a son, Tubal-Cain, who forged all kinds of tools out of bronze and iron. Tubal-Cain's sister was Naamah.  
4:23 Lamech said to his wives, "Adah and Zillah, listen to me; wives of Lamech, hear my words. I have killed a man for wounding me, a young man for injuring me.  
4:24 If Cain is avenged seven times, then Lamech seventy-seven times."  
4:25 Adam made love to his wife again, and she gave birth to a son and named him Seth, saying, "God has granted me another child in place of Abel, since Cain killed him."  
4:26 Seth also had a son, and he named him Enosh. At that time people began to call on the name of the LORD.God said to Noah, "I will establish my covenant with you. You, your sons, your wife, and your sons' wives will enter the ark. Bring two of every living creature, male and female, to keep them alive with you. Gather food for you and them." Noah did everything God commanded.

God told Noah, "Enter the ark with your family, for I have seen you as righteous in this generation. Take seven pairs of every clean animal and one pair of every unclean animal, and seven pairs of every bird, to keep their species alive. In seven days, I will send rain for forty days and nights, and I will wipe out every living thing I have made." Noah did as God commanded.

Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters came. On the 17th day of the second month, the springs of the great deep burst forth, and the windows of heaven opened. Rain fell for forty days and nights. Noah, his family, and all the animals entered the ark, and God shut them in.

The floodwaters increased, lifting the ark high above the earth. The waters rose and covered the mountains by more than twenty feet. Every living thing on the earth perished—birds, livestock, wild animals, and all mankind. Only Noah and those with him in the ark survived.

After forty days, Noah opened a window and sent out a raven, which kept flying back and forth until the waters dried up. He also sent out a dove, but it found no place to rest and returned to the ark. After seven days, he sent the dove again, and it returned with an olive leaf, showing the waters had receded. He waited another seven days and sent the dove out again, and it did not return.

In the 601st year of Noah's life, on the first day of the first month, the waters had dried up. By the 27th day of the second month, the earth was completely dry. God told Noah to come out of the ark with his family and all the animals so they could multiply on the earth.

Noah built an altar and offered sacrifices to God. God was pleased and promised never to curse the ground again or destroy all living creatures. He established a covenant with Noah and his descendants, symbolized by a rainbow, promising never to flood the earth again.

Noah's sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, repopulated the earth. Noah planted a vineyard, drank wine, and became drunk, lying uncovered in his tent. Ham saw his father's nakedness and told his brothers, who covered Noah without looking. When Noah awoke, he cursed Ham's son Canaan and blessed Shem and Japheth.Noah's sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, covered their father's nakedness without looking. When Noah woke up and realized what his youngest son had done, he cursed Ham's son, Canaan, to be a servant to his brothers. He blessed the Lord, the God of Shem, and prayed for Japheth's prosperity. Noah lived 350 years after the flood, making his total lifespan 950 years before he died.

The descendants of Noah's sons spread out after the flood. Japheth's sons included Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras. Gomer's sons were Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah. Javan's sons were Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. These families spread out into their lands, each with its own language and nation.

Ham's sons were Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. Cush's sons included Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca. Raamah's sons were Sheba and Dedan. Cush fathered Nimrod, who became a mighty hunter and established his kingdom in Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calneh in Shinar. From there, Asshur built Nineveh, Rehoboth-Ir, Calah, and Resen, which became a great city. Mizraim's descendants included Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim, Pathrusim, Casluhim (from whom the Philistines came), and Caphtorim. Canaan's descendants included Zidon, Heth, and various tribes like the Jebusites, Amorites, and Girgashites. The Canaanite territory extended from Zidon to Gaza and towards Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim.

Shem's descendants included Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram. Aram's sons were Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash. Arpachshad fathered Shelah, who fathered Eber. Eber had two sons, Peleg (named because the earth was divided in his time) and Joktan. Joktan's sons included Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, Obal, Abimael, Sheba, Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. They lived from Mesha to Sephar in the eastern mountains. These families spread out into their lands, each with its own language and nation.

The whole earth initially spoke one language. As people moved east, they settled in Shinar and decided to build a city and a tower reaching the heavens to make a name for themselves and avoid being scattered. God saw their city and tower and decided to confuse their language, causing them to stop building and scatter across the earth. The city was called Babel because there God confused the language of the whole world.

Shem's lineage continued with Arpachshad, who fathered Shelah, who fathered Eber, who fathered Peleg, who fathered Reu, who fathered Serug, who fathered Nahor, who fathered Terah. Terah fathered Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Haran fathered Lot but died in Ur of the Chaldees. Abram married Sarai, and Nahor married Milcah. Sarai was barren. Terah took Abram, Lot, and Sarai from Ur to Canaan but settled in Haran, where he died at 205 years old.

God told Abram to leave his country and family for a land He would show him, promising to make Abram a great nation and bless him. Abram obeyed, taking Sarai, Lot, and their possessions to Canaan. God appeared to Abram in Shechem, promising the land to his descendants. Abram built an altar there.

A famine forced Abram to go to Egypt. Fearing for his life because of Sarai's beauty, he asked her to say she was his sister. Pharaoh took Sarai into his house, treating Abram well because of her. But God plagued Pharaoh's house, leading Pharaoh to return Sarai to Abram and send them away with their possessions. Abram returned to the Negev, rich in livestock, silver, and gold.Abram moved his camp to the mountain east of Bethel, with Bethel to the west and Ai to the east. He built an altar there and called on the name of the Lord. Abram continued his journey southward.

Abram returned to the place between Bethel and Ai where he had first set up his tent and built an altar. He called on the name of the Lord again.

Lot, who traveled with Abram, also had flocks, herds, and tents. The land couldn't support both of them living together because they had too many possessions. This led to conflicts between Abram's and Lot's herdsmen. The Canaanites and Perizzites were also living in the land at that time.

Abram suggested to Lot that they separate to avoid conflict, offering Lot the choice of land. Lot chose the well-watered plain of the Jordan, which was like the garden of the Lord and the land of Egypt. Lot moved eastward, and they parted ways.

After Lot left, the Lord told Abram to look around from where he was standing. God promised to give all the land he could see to Abram and his descendants forever. God also promised to make Abram's descendants as numerous as the dust of the earth. Abram was told to walk through the land, as it would all be given to him.

Abram settled in Canaan, while Lot lived in the cities of the plain, pitching his tents near Sodom. The men of Sodom were wicked and sinned greatly against the Lord.

Abram moved his camp to the terebinths of Mamre in Hebron and built an altar to the Lord there.

During the time of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim, these kings waged war against Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (Zoar). They joined forces in the Valley of Siddim (the Salt Sea). They served Chedorlaomer for twelve years but rebelled in the thirteenth year. In the fourteenth year, Chedorlaomer and his allies defeated the Rephaim, Zuzim, Emim, and Horites, and then turned back to Kadesh and defeated the Amalekites and Amorites.

The kings of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboiim, and Bela set up battle lines in the Valley of Siddim against Chedorlaomer and his allies. The Valley of Siddim was full of tar pits, and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, falling into them, while the rest escaped to the mountains.

One who escaped reported to Abram that Lot had been captured. Abram gathered 318 trained men from his household and pursued the captors as far as Dan. He divided his forces at night, attacked, and pursued them to Hobah, north of Damascus. Abram recovered all the goods and brought back Lot, his possessions, the women, and the other people.

The king of Sodom went out to meet Abram in the Valley of Shaveh (the King's Valley) after Abram's victory. Melchizedek, king of Salem and priest of God Most High, brought bread and wine and blessed Abram, praising God for delivering Abram's enemies into his hand. Abram gave Melchizedek a tenth of everything.

The king of Sodom offered Abram the goods but asked for the people. Abram refused to take anything, not even a thread or a sandal strap, to avoid the king of Sodom claiming he made Abram rich. Abram only accepted what his men had eaten and the share for his allies, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre.

After these events, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, telling him not to fear, as God was his shield and his reward would be great. Abram expressed concern about being childless and having his servant Eliezer of Damascus as his heir. God assured Abram that his own offspring would be his heir and promised that his descendants would be as numerous as the stars. Abram believed the Lord, and it was credited to him as righteousness.

God reminded Abram that He brought him out of Ur of the Chaldees to give him this land to inherit. Abram asked for a sign to confirm this promise. God instructed him to bring a heifer, a goat, a ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon. Abram brought these animals, cut them in half, and arranged the halves opposite each other, but did not cut the birds. Birds of prey came down on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away.

As the sun was setting, Abram fell into a deep sleep, and a great darkness came over him. God told Abram that his descendants would be strangers in a foreign land, enslaved and oppressed for 400 years. However, God would judge the nation they serve, and afterward, they would come out with great possessions. Abram would die in peace at a good old age, and in the fourth generation, his descendants would return to this land, as the sin of the Amorites had not yet reached its full measure.

When the sun set and darkness fell, a smoking firepot and a blazing torch appeared and passed between the pieces of the animals. On that day, the Lord made a covenant with Abram, promising to give his descendants the land from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates, including the land of the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaim, Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and Jebusites.

Sarai, Abram's wife, had borne him no children. She had an Egyptian maidservant named Hagar. Sarai suggested that Abram sleep with Hagar to build a family through her. Abram agreed, and Hagar conceived. When Hagar realized she was pregnant, she began to despise Sarai. Sarai blamed Abram for the situation, and Abram told her to do whatever she thought best with Hagar. Sarai mistreated Hagar, causing her to flee.

The angel of the Lord found Hagar near a spring in the desert, on the way to Shur. The angel asked Hagar where she had come from and where she was going. Hagar replied that she was running away from her mistress, Sarai.The angel of the Lord told Hagar to return to her mistress and submit to her. The angel also promised to greatly increase her descendants so they would be too numerous to count. The angel said she was pregnant and would have a son named Ishmael because the Lord had heard her misery. Ishmael would be a wild man, in conflict with everyone, but living near his relatives.

Hagar called the Lord who spoke to her "You are the God who sees me," because she said, "I have now seen the One who sees me." The well where this happened was called Beer-lahai-roi, located between Kadesh and Bered. Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram named him Ishmael. Abram was 86 years old when Ishmael was born.

When Abram was 99 years old, the Lord appeared to him and said, "I am God Almighty; walk before me faithfully and be blameless. I will make my covenant between me and you and will greatly increase your numbers." Abram fell facedown, and God said to him, "As for me, this is my covenant with you: You will be the father of many nations. No longer will you be called Abram; your name will be Abraham, for I have made you a father of many nations. I will make you very fruitful; I will make nations of you, and kings will come from you. I will establish my covenant as an everlasting covenant between me and you and your descendants after you for generations to come, to be your God and the God of your descendants after you. The whole land of Canaan, where you now reside as a foreigner, I will give as an everlasting possession to you and your descendants after you; and I will be their God."

God also said to Abraham, "As for Sarai your wife, you are no longer to call her Sarai; her name will be Sarah. I will bless her and will surely give you a son by her. I will bless her so that she will be the mother of nations; kings of peoples will come from her." Abraham fell facedown; he laughed and said to himself, "Will a son be born to a man a hundred years old? Will Sarah bear a child at the age of ninety?" And Abraham said to God, "If only Ishmael might live under your blessing!" Then God said, "Yes, but your wife Sarah will bear you a son, and you will call him Isaac. I will establish my covenant with him as an everlasting covenant for his descendants after him. And as for Ishmael, I have heard you: I will surely bless him; I will make him fruitful and will greatly increase his numbers. He will be the father of twelve rulers, and I will make him into a great nation. But my covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you by this time next year." When he had finished speaking with Abraham, God went up from him.

Then God said to Abraham, "As for you, you must keep my covenant, you and your descendants after you for the generations to come. This is my covenant with you and your descendants after you, the covenant you are to keep: Every male among you shall be circumcised. You are to undergo circumcision, and it will be the sign of the covenant between me and you. For the generations to come, every male among you who is eight days old must be circumcised, including those born in your household or bought with money from a foreigner—those who are not your offspring. Whether born in your household or bought with your money, they must be circumcised. My covenant in your flesh is to be an everlasting covenant. Any uncircumcised male, who has not been circumcised in the flesh, will be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant."

On that very day, Abraham took his son Ishmael and all those born in his household or bought with his money, every male in his household, and circumcised them, as God told him. Abraham was 99 years old when he was circumcised, and his son Ishmael was 13. Abraham and his son Ishmael were both circumcised on that same day. And every male in Abraham's household, including those born in his household or bought from a foreigner, was circumcised with him.

The Lord appeared to Abraham near the great trees of Mamre while he was sitting at the entrance to his tent in the heat of the day. Abraham looked up and saw three men standing nearby. When he saw them, he hurried from the entrance of his tent to meet them and bowed low to the ground. He said, "If I have found favor in your eyes, my lord, do not pass your servant by. Let a little water be brought, and then you may all wash your feet and rest under this tree. Let me get you something to eat, so you can be refreshed and then go on your way—now that you have come to your servant." "Very well," they answered, "do as you say."

So Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah. "Quick," he said, "get three seahs of the finest flour and knead it and bake some bread." Then he ran to the herd and selected a choice, tender calf and gave it to a servant, who hurried to prepare it. He then brought some curds and milk and the calf that had been prepared, and set these before them. While they ate, he stood near them under a tree.

When the men got up to leave, they looked down toward Sodom, and Abraham walked along with them to see them on their way. Then the Lord said, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do? Abraham will surely become a great and powerful nation, and all nations on earth will be blessed through him. For I have chosen him, so that he will direct his children and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord by doing what is right and just, so that the Lord will bring about for Abraham what he has promised him."

Then the Lord said, "The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is so great and their sin so grievous that I will go down and see if what they have done is as bad as the outcry that has reached me. If not, I will know." The men turned away and went toward Sodom, but Abraham remained standing before the Lord. Then Abraham approached him and said: "Will you sweep away the righteous with the wicked? What if there are fifty righteous people in the city? Will you really sweep it away and not spare the place for the sake of the fifty righteous people in it? Far be it from you to do such a thing—to kill the righteous with the wicked, treating the righteous and the wicked alike. Far be it from you! Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?"

The Lord said, "If I find fifty righteous people in the city of Sodom, I will spare the whole place for their sake." Then Abraham spoke up again: "Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the Lord, though I am nothing but dust and ashes, what if the number of the righteous is five less than fifty? Will you destroy the whole city for lack of five people?" "If I find forty-five there," he said, "I will not destroy it."

Once again he spoke to him, "What if only forty are found there?" He said, "For the sake of forty, I will not do it." Then he said, "May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak. What if only thirty can be found there?" He answered, "I will not do it if I find thirty there." Abraham said, "Now that I have been so bold as to speak to the Lord, what if only twenty can be found there?" He said, "For the sake of twenty, I will not destroy it." Then he said, "May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak just once more. What if only ten can be found there?" He answered, "For the sake of ten, I will not destroy it." When the Lord had finished speaking with Abraham, he left, and Abraham returned home.

Two angels arrived at Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting in the gateway of the city. When he saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the ground. "My lords," he said, "please turn aside to your servant's house. You can wash your feet and spend the night and then go on your way early in the morning."Lot insisted that the visitors stay at his house, and they finally agreed. He prepared a feast with unleavened bread, and they ate. The next morning, Abraham returned to the place where he had spoken with the Lord and saw smoke rising from Sodom and Gomorrah, like smoke from a furnace. God remembered Abraham and saved Lot from the destruction of the cities.

Before the visitors went to bed, the men of Sodom surrounded Lot's house, demanding to see the visitors. Lot went outside, closed the door behind him, and pleaded with them not to act wickedly. He even offered his two daughters to them instead, but they refused and tried to break down the door. The visitors pulled Lot back inside and struck the men outside with blindness, so they couldn't find the door.

The visitors told Lot to gather his family and leave the city because it was going to be destroyed. Lot warned his sons-in-law, but they thought he was joking. At dawn, the visitors urged Lot to hurry, and they led him, his wife, and his two daughters out of the city. They told them to flee to the mountains and not look back. Lot asked to escape to a nearby small city instead, and they agreed. The city was called Zoar.

As Lot reached Zoar, the Lord rained down burning sulfur on Sodom and Gomorrah, destroying the cities and everything in them. Lot's wife looked back and turned into a pillar of salt. Lot and his daughters left Zoar and lived in a cave in the mountains. The daughters, believing there were no men left to continue their family line, got their father drunk and slept with him. Both became pregnant. The older daughter had a son named Moab, the ancestor of the Moabites, and the younger daughter had a son named Ben-Ammi, the ancestor of the Ammonites.

Abraham moved to the Negev and lived between Kadesh and Shur, staying in Gerar. He told people that Sarah was his sister, so King Abimelech took her. God warned Abimelech in a dream that Sarah was married, and Abimelech returned her to Abraham, giving him sheep, cattle, and servants. Abimelech also gave Abraham land to live on and a thousand pieces of silver to Sarah as a sign of her innocence. Abraham prayed, and God healed Abimelech's household.

The Lord kept His promise to Sarah, and she bore a son, Isaac, to Abraham in his old age. Abraham circumcised Isaac when he was eight days old. Sarah said that God had brought her laughter, and everyone who heard would laugh with her. Isaac grew, and Abraham held a great feast when he was weaned. Sarah saw Hagar's son mocking and told Abraham to send Hagar and her son away, as he would not share in Isaac's inheritance. God told Abraham to listen to Sarah, promising to make a nation of Hagar's son as well. Abraham gave Hagar and her son provisions and sent them away.Hagar wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba after being sent away. When their water ran out, she placed her child under a shrub and sat a distance away, not wanting to watch him die. She wept, but God heard the boy's cries. An angel called to Hagar from heaven, reassuring her that God had heard the boy and promising to make him a great nation. God then opened her eyes to a well of water, and she filled her bottle and gave the boy a drink. The boy grew up in the wilderness, became an archer, and lived in the wilderness of Paran. His mother found him a wife from Egypt.

At that time, Abimelech and Phicol, his army commander, approached Abraham, acknowledging that God was with him in everything he did. They asked Abraham to swear not to deal falsely with them or their descendants, but to show the same kindness they had shown him. Abraham agreed.

Later, God tested Abraham by asking him to sacrifice his beloved son Isaac in the land of Moriah. Abraham obeyed, taking Isaac and two servants to the designated place. On the third day, Abraham saw the place from afar and told his servants to stay while he and Isaac went to worship. Isaac carried the wood for the offering, and Abraham carried the fire and knife. Isaac asked where the lamb for the offering was, and Abraham replied that God would provide it.

When they reached the place, Abraham built an altar, arranged the wood, and bound Isaac on it. As he was about to slay his son, an angel called out to stop him, acknowledging Abraham's fear of God. Abraham saw a ram caught in a thicket and offered it instead of Isaac. He named the place "The Lord Will Provide."

Abraham and Abimelech made a covenant at Beersheba after resolving a dispute over a well. Abraham planted a tamarisk tree there and called on the name of the Lord. He lived in the land of the Philistines for many days.

After these events, Abraham was informed that his brother Nahor's wife Milcah had borne children, including Bethuel, who fathered Rebekah. Sarah lived 127 years and died in Hebron. Abraham mourned her and negotiated with the Hittites to buy the cave of Machpelah from Ephron the Hittite for 400 shekels of silver as a burial site. Abraham buried Sarah there, securing the field and cave as his possession.

Abraham, now old and blessed by the Lord, instructed his servant to find a wife for Isaac from his homeland, not from the Canaanites. The servant questioned what to do if the woman was unwilling to come, and Abraham warned him not to take Isaac back to their former land. The Lord, who had guided Abraham, would send an angel to ensure the servant's success.Abraham's servant continued his journey to find a wife for Isaac. He prayed to God for guidance, asking that the woman who offers water to him and his camels be the chosen one. Before he finished praying, Rebekah appeared with a pitcher on her shoulder. She was beautiful and a virgin. The servant asked her for a drink, and she offered water to him and his camels, fulfilling his prayer.

The servant gave Rebekah a gold ring and bracelets and asked about her family. She revealed she was the daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son. The servant bowed and thanked God for leading him to Abraham's relatives. Rebekah ran to tell her family, and her brother Laban welcomed the servant into their home.

The servant explained his mission and how God had guided him to Rebekah. Laban and Bethuel agreed that this was God's will and allowed Rebekah to go with the servant to marry Isaac. The servant gave gifts to Rebekah and her family, and they celebrated. The next morning, Rebekah agreed to leave immediately.

Rebekah and her maids traveled with the servant to meet Isaac. When they arrived, Isaac was meditating in a field. Rebekah saw him, covered herself with a veil, and met him. The servant recounted all that had happened. Isaac took Rebekah into his mother Sarah's tent, and she became his wife. He loved her, and she comforted him after his mother's death.

Abraham took another wife, Keturah, who bore him several children. He gave all his possessions to Isaac but provided gifts to his other sons and sent them away. Abraham lived 175 years and died at a good old age. Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, which Abraham had purchased.After Abraham's death, God blessed his son Isaac, who lived near Beer-lahai-roi. 

**The Generations of Ishmael:**
Ishmael, Abraham's son with Hagar the Egyptian, had twelve sons: Nebaioth, Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedem. These sons became leaders of their own tribes. Ishmael lived 137 years and passed away, and his descendants settled from Havilah to Shur, near Egypt.

**The Generations of Isaac:**
Isaac, Abraham's son, married Rebekah, daughter of Bethuel the Aramean, when he was forty. Rebekah was barren, but Isaac prayed, and she conceived twins. The twins struggled within her, and God told her that two nations were in her womb, with the older serving the younger. Esau, the firstborn, was red and hairy, while Jacob, the second, was born holding Esau's heel. Isaac was sixty when they were born.

Esau became a skilled hunter, while Jacob was a quiet man who stayed at home. Isaac favored Esau for his hunting skills, but Rebekah loved Jacob. One day, Esau came home famished and asked Jacob for some lentil stew. Jacob agreed, but only if Esau sold him his birthright. Esau, thinking he was about to die, agreed and sold his birthright to Jacob.

**Isaac and Abimelech:**
During a famine, Isaac went to Abimelech, king of the Philistines, in Gerar. God told Isaac not to go to Egypt but to stay in the land He would show him. God promised to bless Isaac and his descendants, just as He had promised Abraham. Isaac stayed in Gerar but told the men there that Rebekah was his sister, fearing they would kill him for her beauty. Abimelech discovered the truth and warned his people not to harm Isaac or Rebekah.

Isaac prospered in Gerar, becoming very wealthy, which made the Philistines envious. They filled the wells that Abraham's servants had dug. Abimelech asked Isaac to leave because he had become too powerful. Isaac moved to the valley of Gerar and reopened the wells. He faced disputes over water rights but eventually found peace at a well he named Rehoboth, meaning "room."

God appeared to Isaac in Beer-sheba, reaffirming His promise to bless him. Isaac built an altar and called on God's name. Abimelech came to make a peace treaty with Isaac, recognizing that God was with him. They made a covenant, and Isaac's servants found water, naming the well Shibah, which led to the city's name, Beer-sheba.

**Esau's Marriages:**
Esau married Judith and Basemath, both Hittites, which caused grief to Isaac and Rebekah.

**Isaac's Blessing:**
When Isaac was old and nearly blind, he asked Esau to hunt and prepare a meal so he could bless him. Rebekah overheard and instructed Jacob to bring her two young goats. She prepared a meal for Isaac and dressed Jacob in Esau's clothes, covering his hands and neck with goat skins to mimic Esau's hairiness.Rebekah covered Jacob's hands and neck with goat skins to mimic Esau's hairiness. She then gave Jacob the prepared food and bread to take to his father, Isaac.

Jacob approached Isaac and said, "My father." Isaac responded, "Here I am; who are you, my son?" Jacob replied, "I am Esau, your firstborn. I have done as you asked. Please sit up and eat some of my game so that you may bless me." Isaac asked, "How did you find it so quickly, my son?" Jacob answered, "Because the LORD your God granted me success."

Isaac said to Jacob, "Come closer so I can touch you, my son, to know whether you really are my son Esau or not." Jacob went closer to his father Isaac, who touched him and said, "The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau." Isaac did not recognize him because his hands were hairy like Esau's, so he blessed him.

Isaac asked again, "Are you really my son Esau?" Jacob replied, "I am." Isaac said, "Bring me some of your game to eat, so that I may give you my blessing." Jacob brought it to him, and Isaac ate. Jacob also brought him wine, and he drank. Then Isaac said, "Come here, my son, and kiss me." Jacob went to him and kissed him. Isaac smelled his clothes and blessed him, saying, "Ah, the smell of my son is like the smell of a field that the LORD has blessed. May God give you heaven's dew and earth's richness—an abundance of grain and new wine. May nations serve you and peoples bow down to you. Be lord over your brothers, and may the sons of your mother bow down to you. May those who curse you be cursed and those who bless you be blessed."

As soon as Isaac finished blessing Jacob and Jacob had scarcely left his father's presence, Esau returned from hunting. He too prepared some tasty food and brought it to his father. He said, "My father, please sit up and eat some of my game, so that you may give me your blessing." Isaac asked, "Who are you?" Esau replied, "I am your son, your firstborn, Esau." Isaac trembled violently and said, "Who was it, then, that hunted game and brought it to me? I ate it just before you came and I blessed him—and indeed he will be blessed!"

When Esau heard his father's words, he burst out with a loud and bitter cry and said to his father, "Bless me—me too, my father!" But Isaac said, "Your brother came deceitfully and took your blessing." Esau said, "Isn't he rightly named Jacob? He has deceived me these two times: He took my birthright, and now he's taken my blessing!" Then he asked, "Haven't you reserved any blessing for me?" Isaac answered Esau, "I have made him lord over you and have made all his relatives his servants, and I have sustained him with grain and new wine. So what can I possibly do for you, my son?" Esau said to his father, "Do you have only one blessing, my father? Bless me too, my father!" Then Esau wept aloud.

His father Isaac answered him, "Your dwelling will be away from the earth's richness, away from the dew of heaven above. You will live by the sword and you will serve your brother. But when you grow restless, you will throw his yoke from off your neck."

Esau held a grudge against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him. He said to himself, "The days of mourning for my father are near; then I will kill my brother Jacob."

When Rebekah was told what her older son Esau had said, she sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him, "Your brother Esau is planning to avenge himself by killing you. Now then, my son, do what I say: Flee at once to my brother Laban in Haran. Stay with him for a while until your brother's fury subsides. When your brother is no longer angry with you and forgets what you did to him, I'll send word for you to come back from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?"

Then Rebekah said to Isaac, "I'm disgusted with living because of these Hittite women. If Jacob takes a wife from among the women of this land, from Hittite women like these, my life will not be worth living."

So Isaac called for Jacob and blessed him. Then he commanded him, "Do not marry a Canaanite woman. Go at once to Paddan Aram, to the house of your mother's father Bethuel. Take a wife for yourself there, from among the daughters of Laban, your mother's brother. May God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful and increase your numbers until you become a community of peoples. May he give you and your descendants the blessing given to Abraham, so that you may take possession of the land where you now reside as a foreigner, the land God gave to Abraham." Then Isaac sent Jacob on his way, and he went to Paddan Aram, to Laban son of Bethuel the Aramean, the brother of Rebekah, who was the mother of Jacob and Esau.

Now Esau learned that Isaac had blessed Jacob and had sent him to Paddan Aram to take a wife from there, and that when he blessed him he commanded him, "Do not marry a Canaanite woman," and that Jacob had obeyed his father and mother and had gone to Paddan Aram. Esau then realized how displeasing the Canaanite women were to his father Isaac; so he went to Ishmael and married Mahalath, the sister of Nebaioth and daughter of Ishmael son of Abraham, in addition to the wives he already had.

Jacob left Beersheba and set out for Haran. When he reached a certain place, he stopped for the night because the sun had set. Taking one of the stones there, he put it under his head and lay down to sleep. He had a dream in which he saw a stairway resting on the earth, with its top reaching to heaven, and the angels of God were ascending and descending on it. There above it stood the LORD, and he said, "I am the LORD, the God of your father Abraham and the God of Isaac. I will give you and your descendants the land on which you are lying. Your descendants will be like the dust of the earth, and you will spread out to the west and to the east, to the north and to the south. All peoples on earth will be blessed through you and your offspring. I am with you and will watch over you wherever you go, and I will bring you back to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you."

When Jacob awoke from his sleep, he thought, "Surely the LORD is in this place, and I was not aware of it." He was afraid and said, "How awesome is this place! This is none other than the house of God; this is the gate of heaven." Early the next morning Jacob took the stone he had placed under his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it. He called that place Bethel, though the city used to be called Luz.

Then Jacob made a vow, saying, "If God will be with me and will watch over me on this journey I am taking and will give me food to eat and clothes to wear so that I return safely to my father's household, then the LORD will be my God and this stone that I have set up as a pillar will be God's house, and of all that you give me I will give you a tenth."

Jacob continued on his journey and came to the land of the eastern peoples. There he saw a well in the open country, with three flocks of sheep lying near it because the flocks were watered from that well. The stone over the mouth of the well was large. When all the flocks were gathered there, the shepherds would roll the stone away from the well's mouth and water the sheep. Then they would return the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.

Jacob asked the shepherds, "My brothers, where are you from?" "We're from Haran," they replied. He said to them, "Do you know Laban, Nahor's grandson?" "Yes, we know him," they answered. Then Jacob asked them, "Is he well?" "Yes, he is," they said, "and here comes his daughter Rachel with the sheep."

"Look," he said, "the sun is still high; it is not time for the flocks to be gathered. Water the sheep and take them back to pasture." "We can't," they replied, "until all the flocks are gathered and the stone has been rolled away from the mouth of the well. Then we will water the sheep."

While he was still talking with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she was a shepherd. When Jacob saw Rachel daughter of his uncle Laban, and Laban's sheep, he went over and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered his uncle's sheep. Then Jacob kissed Rachel and began to weep aloud. He had told Rachel that he was a relative of her father and a son of Rebekah. So she ran and told her father. As soon as Laban heard the news about Jacob, his sister's son, he hurried to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him to his home.Jacob stayed with Laban for a month. Laban then said to Jacob, "Just because you're my relative, should you work for me for nothing? Tell me what your wages should be."

Laban had two daughters: Leah, the older one, and Rachel, the younger one. Leah had weak eyes, but Rachel was beautiful. Jacob loved Rachel and said, "I'll work for you for seven years in exchange for your younger daughter, Rachel."

Laban agreed, saying, "It's better for her to marry you than someone else. Stay with me." So Jacob worked seven years for Rachel, but it felt like only a few days to him because he loved her so much.

After the seven years, Jacob said to Laban, "Give me my wife so I can be with her." Laban gathered all the men of the place and held a feast. But in the evening, he took Leah to Jacob, and Jacob slept with her. Laban also gave Leah a servant named Zilpah.

In the morning, Jacob realized it was Leah and confronted Laban, "Why did you deceive me? I worked for Rachel, not Leah!"

Laban replied, "It's not our custom to give the younger daughter before the older one. Finish this bridal week with Leah, and I'll give you Rachel as well, in exchange for another seven years of work."

Jacob agreed, and after the bridal week with Leah, Laban gave him Rachel too. Laban also gave Rachel a servant named Bilhah. Jacob loved Rachel more than Leah and worked for Laban another seven years.

The Lord saw that Leah was unloved, so He enabled her to have children, while Rachel remained childless. Leah had a son named Reuben, saying, "The Lord has seen my misery; now my husband will love me." She had another son named Simeon, saying, "The Lord heard I was unloved and gave me this one too." She had a third son named Levi, saying, "Now my husband will become attached to me because I've given him three sons." She had a fourth son named Judah, saying, "This time I will praise the Lord." Then she stopped having children.

Rachel, seeing she couldn't have children, envied Leah and said to Jacob, "Give me children, or I'll die!" Jacob became angry and said, "Am I in God's place, who has kept you from having children?" Rachel then gave her servant Bilhah to Jacob as a wife, and Bilhah had a son named Dan. Bilhah had another son named Naphtali, and Rachel said, "I've had a great struggle with my sister, and I've won."

Leah, seeing she had stopped having children, gave her servant Zilpah to Jacob as a wife. Zilpah had a son named Gad and another named Asher. Leah said, "How happy I am! The women will call me happy."

During the wheat harvest, Reuben found some mandrakes and brought them to Leah. Rachel asked for some, and Leah replied, "Isn't it enough you took my husband? Now you want my son's mandrakes too?" Rachel agreed to let Leah spend the night with Jacob in exchange for the mandrakes. Leah conceived again and had a fifth son named Issachar, saying, "God has rewarded me for giving my servant to my husband." She had a sixth son named Zebulun, saying, "God has given me a good gift. Now my husband will treat me with honor because I've given him six sons." She also had a daughter named Dinah.

God remembered Rachel and enabled her to conceive. She had a son named Joseph, saying, "May the Lord add another son to me."

After Rachel had Joseph, Jacob asked Laban to let him return to his homeland with his wives and children. Laban, realizing he had been blessed because of Jacob, asked him to name his wages. Jacob proposed to continue tending Laban's flocks in exchange for all the speckled, spotted, and dark-colored animals. Laban agreed, but then separated those animals from the rest of the flock, putting a three-day journey between them and Jacob.

Jacob used a clever breeding technique to ensure that the stronger animals produced speckled and spotted offspring, which became his. As a result, Jacob became very wealthy, with large flocks, servants, camels, and donkeys.

Laban's sons noticed Jacob's growing wealth and accused him of taking what belonged to their father. Laban's attitude toward Jacob also changed. The Lord then told Jacob to return to his homeland, promising to be with him. Jacob called Rachel and Leah to the field and explained the situation, including how Laban had repeatedly changed his wages but God had protected him. Jacob recounted a dream where God showed him that all the male goats mating with the flock were streaked, speckled, or spotted, confirming that God had seen Laban's unfair treatment.Jacob said, "I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed a pillar and made a vow to Me. Now, get up, leave this land, and return to your homeland."

Rachel and Leah replied, "Do we have any share or inheritance left in our father's house? He treats us like strangers, selling us and consuming our money. All the wealth God took from our father belongs to us and our children. So, do whatever God has told you."

Jacob then got up, put his children and wives on camels, and took all his livestock and possessions he had acquired in Paddan-aram to go to his father Isaac in the land of Canaan.

While Laban was away shearing his sheep, Rachel stole her father's household gods. Jacob deceived Laban the Aramean by not telling him he was fleeing. He left with everything he had, crossed the river, and headed for the hill country of Gilead.

Three days later, Laban was informed that Jacob had fled. He took his relatives with him and pursued Jacob for seven days, catching up with him in the hill country of Gilead. But God came to Laban in a dream and warned him not to say anything good or bad to Jacob.

When Laban reached Jacob, he said, "What have you done? You deceived me and took my daughters like captives of war. Why did you run away secretly and deceive me? You didn't even let me kiss my grandchildren and daughters goodbye. You acted foolishly. I have the power to harm you, but the God of your father spoke to me last night and warned me not to say anything to you. Now, you have gone because you longed to return to your father's house, but why did you steal my gods?"

Jacob answered, "I was afraid you would take your daughters from me by force. If you find anyone with your gods, they shall not live. In the presence of our relatives, see for yourself what is yours and take it." Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen the gods.

Laban searched Jacob's tent, Leah's tent, and the tents of the two maidservants but found nothing. When he entered Rachel's tent, she had hidden the gods in the camel's saddle and was sitting on them. She said to her father, "Don't be angry, my lord, that I cannot stand up in your presence; I'm having my period." So, Laban searched but did not find the gods.

Jacob became angry and confronted Laban, "What is my crime? What sin have I committed that you pursued me? You have searched through all my belongings and found nothing of yours. Let my relatives and yours decide between us. I have been with you for twenty years. Your sheep and goats have not miscarried, and I have not eaten rams from your flocks. I did not bring you animals torn by wild beasts; I bore the loss myself. You demanded payment from me for anything stolen by day or night. I endured scorching heat by day and cold by night, and sleep fled from my eyes. I have worked for you for twenty years—fourteen years for your two daughters and six years for your flocks, and you changed my wages ten times. If the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the Fear of Isaac had not been with me, you would have sent me away empty-handed. But God has seen my hardship and the toil of my hands, and last night He rebuked you."

Laban answered, "The women are my daughters, the children are my children, and the flocks are my flocks. Everything you see is mine. Yet, what can I do today about these daughters of mine or the children they have borne? Come now, let's make a covenant, you and I, and let it serve as a witness between us."

Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar. He said to his relatives, "Gather some stones." They took stones and piled them in a heap, and they ate there by the heap. Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha, and Jacob called it Galeed. Laban said, "This heap is a witness between you and me today." That is why it was called Galeed. It was also called Mizpah because he said, "May the Lord keep watch between you and me when we are away from each other. If you mistreat my daughters or take other wives besides my daughters, even though no one is with us, remember that God is a witness between you and me."

Laban also said to Jacob, "Here is this heap, and here is this pillar I have set up between you and me. This heap is a witness, and this pillar is a witness, that I will not go past this heap to your side to harm you, and you will not go past this heap and pillar to my side to harm me. May the God of Abraham and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge between us." So Jacob took an oath in the name of the Fear of his father Isaac. He offered a sacrifice there in the hill country and invited his relatives to a meal. After they had eaten, they spent the night there.

Early the next morning, Laban kissed his grandchildren and daughters and blessed them. Then he left and returned home.

Jacob continued on his way, and the angels of God met him. When Jacob saw them, he said, "This is the camp of God!" So he named that place Mahanaim.

Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Esau in the land of Seir, the country of Edom. He instructed them, "This is what you are to say to my lord Esau: 'Your servant Jacob says, I have been staying with Laban and have remained there till now. I have cattle and donkeys, sheep and goats, male and female servants. Now I am sending this message to my lord, that I may find favor in your eyes.'"

When the messengers returned to Jacob, they said, "We went to your brother Esau, and now he is coming to meet you with four hundred men."

Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed. He divided the people who were with him into two groups, along with the flocks, herds, and camels. He thought, "If Esau comes and attacks one group, the other group may escape."

Jacob prayed, "O God of my father Abraham, God of my father Isaac, Lord, you who said to me, 'Go back to your country and your relatives, and I will make you prosper,' I am unworthy of all the kindness and faithfulness you have shown your servant. I had only my staff when I crossed this Jordan, but now I have become two camps. Save me, I pray, from the hand of my brother Esau, for I am afraid he will come and attack me, and also the mothers with their children. But you have said, 'I will surely make you prosper and will make your descendants like the sand of the sea, which cannot be counted.'"

Jacob spent the night there, and from what he had with him, he selected a gift for his brother Esau: two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams, thirty female camels with their young, forty cows and ten bulls, and twenty female donkeys and ten male donkeys. He put them in the care of his servants, each herd by itself, and said to his servants, "Go ahead of me, and keep some space between the herds."

He instructed the one in the lead, "When my brother Esau meets you and asks, 'Who do you belong to, and where are you going, and who owns all these animals in front of you?' then you are to say, 'They belong to your servant Jacob. They are a gift sent to my lord Esau, and he is coming behind us.'"

He also instructed the second, the third, and all the others who followed the herds: "You are to say the same thing to Esau when you meet him. And be sure to say, 'Your servant Jacob is coming behind us.'" For he thought, "I will pacify him with these gifts I am sending on ahead; later, when I see him, perhaps he will receive me."

So Jacob's gifts went on ahead of him, but he himself spent the night in the camp.

That night Jacob got up and took his two wives, his two female servants, and his eleven sons and crossed the ford of the Jabbok. After he had sent them across the stream, he sent over all his possessions. So Jacob was left alone, and a man wrestled with him till daybreak. When the man saw that he could not overpower him, he touched the socket of Jacob's hip so that his hip was wrenched as he wrestled with the man. Then the man said, "Let me go, for it is daybreak."

But Jacob replied, "I will not let you go unless you bless me."

The man asked him, "What is your name?"

"Jacob," he answered.

Then the man said, "Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel, because you have struggled with God and with humans and have overcome."Jacob's name was changed to Israel because he had struggled with God and humans and had prevailed. Jacob then asked the man for his name, but the man did not answer and instead blessed him. Jacob named the place Peniel, saying, "I have seen God face to face, and yet my life was spared." As the sun rose, Jacob limped because of his hip. This is why the Israelites do not eat the tendon attached to the hip socket, because Jacob's hip was touched there.

When Jacob saw Esau approaching with 400 men, he divided his children among Leah, Rachel, and the two maidservants. He placed the maidservants and their children in front, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph last. Jacob himself went ahead and bowed to the ground seven times as he approached Esau. Esau ran to meet Jacob, embraced him, kissed him, and they both wept. Esau then saw the women and children and asked who they were. Jacob replied, "These are the children God has graciously given your servant."

The maidservants and their children came forward and bowed down, followed by Leah and her children, and finally Joseph and Rachel. Esau asked about the meaning of all the animals he had met, and Jacob explained they were a gift to find favor in Esau's eyes. Esau said he had enough and told Jacob to keep what he had, but Jacob insisted, saying seeing Esau's face was like seeing the face of God, and Esau had received him favorably. Jacob urged Esau to accept the gift, and Esau did.

Esau suggested they travel together, but Jacob explained that the children and young animals needed to move at a slower pace. Esau offered to leave some of his men with Jacob, but Jacob declined, wanting only to find favor in Esau's eyes. Esau then returned to Seir, and Jacob went to Succoth, where he built a house and shelters for his livestock.

Jacob later arrived safely in Shechem in Canaan and bought a piece of land from the sons of Hamor for 100 pieces of silver. He set up an altar there and called it El-Elohe-Israel.

Dinah, Jacob's daughter, went out to visit the women of the land. Shechem, the son of Hamor, saw her, took her, and violated her. He then fell in love with her and spoke tenderly to her. Shechem asked his father to get Dinah as his wife. Jacob heard about the incident but waited for his sons to return from the fields before taking action. Hamor went to speak with Jacob, and Jacob's sons were furious when they heard what had happened. Hamor asked for Dinah to be given to Shechem as a wife and proposed intermarriage between their peoples. Shechem offered to pay any bride price for Dinah.

Jacob's sons deceitfully agreed to the marriage on the condition that all the males in Shechem be circumcised. Hamor and Shechem agreed and convinced the men of their city to be circumcised. Three days later, while the men were still in pain, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers, attacked the city, killing all the males, including Hamor and Shechem. They rescued Dinah and plundered the city, taking livestock, women, and children.

Jacob rebuked Simeon and Levi, fearing retaliation from the Canaanites and Perizzites. They defended their actions, saying their sister should not be treated like a prostitute.

God told Jacob to go to Bethel and build an altar. Jacob instructed his household to get rid of foreign gods, purify themselves, and change their clothes. They gave Jacob all their foreign gods and earrings, which he buried under an oak tree near Shechem. As they traveled, God instilled fear in the surrounding cities, so no one pursued them. Jacob arrived in Bethel, built an altar, and called the place El-Bethel. Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died and was buried under an oak below Bethel.

God appeared to Jacob again, blessed him, and reaffirmed his name change to Israel. God promised that nations and kings would come from him and that the land given to Abraham and Isaac would be given to him and his descendants. Jacob set up a stone pillar at the place where God had spoken to him, poured a drink offering on it, and called the place Bethel.Jacob named the place where God spoke to him Bethel. 

As they traveled from Bethel, Rachel went into labor and had a difficult childbirth. The midwife reassured her, saying, "Don't be afraid; you have another son." As Rachel was dying, she named her son Ben-Oni, but Jacob called him Benjamin. Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem. Jacob set up a pillar on her grave, which still stands today.

Jacob had twelve sons: 
- Leah's sons: Reuben (Jacob's firstborn), Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun.
- Rachel's sons: Joseph and Benjamin.
- Bilhah's sons (Rachel's maidservant): Dan and Naphtali.
- Zilpah's sons (Leah's maidservant): Gad and Asher.

Jacob, now called Israel, moved and set up camp beyond Migdal Eder. While living there, Reuben slept with Bilhah, his father's concubine, and Israel found out.

Jacob then went to visit his father Isaac in Mamre, near Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac had lived. Isaac lived to be 180 years old, then he died and was buried by his sons Esau and Jacob.

Esau's family history is as follows:
- Esau, also known as Edom, took wives from the Canaanites: Adah (daughter of Elon the Hittite), Oholibamah (daughter of Anah, granddaughter of Zibeon the Hivite), and Basemath (Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth).
- Adah bore Eliphaz, Basemath bore Reuel, and Oholibamah bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.

Esau moved his family and possessions to a land away from Jacob because their wealth was too great for them to live together. Esau settled in the hill country of Seir, also known as Edom.

Joseph, at seventeen, was tending the flocks with his brothers, the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah. He brought a bad report about them to their father. Israel loved Joseph more than his other sons because he was born in his old age, and he made Joseph a richly ornamented robe. This favoritism caused Joseph's brothers to hate him.

Joseph had a dream where his sheaf of grain stood upright while his brothers' sheaves gathered around and bowed down to it. His brothers hated him even more for his dreams and words. He had another dream where the sun, moon, and eleven stars bowed down to him. When he told this to his father and brothers, his father rebuked him, asking if they would indeed bow down to him. His brothers were jealous, but his father kept the matter in mind.

Esau's descendants included chiefs and kings who ruled in Edom before any king reigned over the Israelites. Some of these kings were Bela, Jobab, Husham, Hadad, Samlah, Shaul, Baal-Hanan, and Hadar.

Joseph's brothers went to graze their father's flocks near Shechem. Israel sent Joseph to check on them. When Joseph found them in Dothan, his brothers saw him coming and plotted to kill him, calling him "the dreamer." They planned to throw him into a pit and say a wild animal devoured him. Reuben intervened, suggesting they not kill him but throw him into a pit, intending to rescue him later. When Joseph arrived, they stripped him of his ornate robe and threw him into an empty pit. As they sat to eat, they saw a caravan of Ishmaelites heading to Egypt. Judah suggested selling Joseph to the Ishmaelites instead of killing him."Let's not harm him ourselves. Instead, let's sell him to the Ishmaelites since he is our brother, our own flesh and blood." His brothers agreed. 

Meanwhile, a group of Midianite merchants passed by. They pulled Joseph out of the pit and sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. The Ishmaelites then took Joseph to Egypt. 

When Reuben returned to the pit and saw that Joseph was gone, he tore his clothes in distress. He went back to his brothers and said, "The boy is gone! What am I going to do now?" 

They took Joseph's colorful coat, killed a goat, and dipped the coat in its blood. They brought the coat to their father and said, "We found this. See if it's your son's coat." Jacob recognized it and said, "It is my son's coat! A wild animal must have devoured him. Joseph has surely been torn to pieces." Jacob tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and mourned for his son for many days. All his sons and daughters tried to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted, saying, "I will go to my grave mourning for my son." And Jacob wept for him.

Meanwhile, the Midianites sold Joseph in Egypt to Potiphar, one of Pharaoh's officials, the captain of the guard.

At that time, Judah left his brothers and went to stay with a man named Hirah in Adullam. There, Judah met the daughter of a Canaanite named Shua. He married her, and she bore him three sons: Er, Onan, and Shelah. Judah found a wife named Tamar for his firstborn, Er. But Er was wicked in the Lord's sight, so the Lord put him to death. Judah then told Onan to fulfill his duty to his brother by marrying Tamar and producing offspring for him. However, Onan knew the offspring would not be his, so he spilled his semen on the ground to avoid providing offspring for his brother. This act displeased the Lord, so He put Onan to death as well. Judah then told Tamar to live as a widow in her father's house until his son Shelah grew up, fearing that Shelah might also die like his brothers. So Tamar went to live in her father's house.

Joseph was taken to Egypt and sold to Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh and captain of the guard. The Lord was with Joseph, and he prospered in Potiphar's house. Potiphar saw that the Lord was with Joseph and made him his personal attendant, putting him in charge of his household and everything he owned. From the time Joseph was put in charge, the Lord blessed Potiphar's household because of Joseph. Potiphar left everything he had in Joseph's care, only concerning himself with the food he ate. Joseph was well-built and handsome.

After some time, Judah's wife, the daughter of Shua, died. After mourning, Judah went to Timnah to shear his sheep, accompanied by his friend Hirah. Tamar was told that her father-in-law was going to Timnah, so she took off her widow's clothes, covered herself with a veil, and sat at the entrance to Enaim, on the way to Timnah. She did this because she saw that Shelah had grown up, but she had not been given to him as a wife. When Judah saw her, he thought she was a prostitute because she had covered her face. He approached her and asked to sleep with her, not realizing she was his daughter-in-law. She asked what he would give her, and he promised a young goat from his flock. She asked for a pledge until he sent it, and he gave her his seal, cord, and staff. They slept together, and she became pregnant. She then left and put on her widow's clothes again.

Judah sent the young goat with his friend Hirah to retrieve his pledge, but Hirah couldn't find her. He asked the men of the place about the prostitute, but they said there had been no prostitute there. Hirah returned to Judah and told him he couldn't find her, and the men said there was no prostitute. Judah said, "Let her keep what she has, or we will become a laughingstock. I sent her this goat, but you couldn't find her."

About three months later, Judah was told that Tamar had acted like a prostitute and was now pregnant. Judah ordered her to be brought out and burned. As she was being brought out, she sent a message to her father-in-law, saying, "I am pregnant by the man who owns these." She showed the seal, cord, and staff. Judah recognized them and said, "She is more righteous than I, since I wouldn't give her to my son Shelah." He did not sleep with her again.

When it was time for Tamar to give birth, she had twins. During labor, one baby put out a hand, and the midwife tied a scarlet thread around it, saying, "This one came out first." But the baby pulled his hand back, and his brother came out first. She said, "So this is how you have broken out!" And he was named Perez. Then his brother, who had the scarlet thread on his hand, came out, and he was named Zerah.

The Lord was with Joseph in prison and showed him kindness, granting him favor with the prison warden. The warden put Joseph in charge of all the prisoners and everything that was done there. The warden paid no attention to anything under Joseph's care because the Lord was with Joseph and gave him success in whatever he did.After these events, the king of Egypt's butler and baker offended their lord. Pharaoh was angry with his two officers, the chief butler and the chief baker, and had them imprisoned in the house of the captain of the guard, where Joseph was also confined. The captain of the guard assigned Joseph to attend to them, and they remained in custody for some time.

One night, both the butler and the baker had dreams, each with its own meaning. When Joseph saw them the next morning, he noticed they were upset. He asked them, "Why do you look so sad today?" They replied, "We both had dreams, but there's no one to interpret them." Joseph said, "Interpretations belong to God. Tell me your dreams."

The chief butler shared his dream first: "In my dream, I saw a vine with three branches. As it budded, its blossoms turned into clusters of ripe grapes. Pharaoh's cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes, squeezed them into Pharaoh's cup, and handed the cup to Pharaoh." Joseph explained, "The three branches represent three days. In three days, Pharaoh will restore you to your position, and you will once again place Pharaoh's cup in his hand, just as you used to do. But when things go well for you, remember me and show me kindness. Mention me to Pharaoh and get me out of this prison, for I was forcibly taken from the land of the Hebrews, and even here I have done nothing to deserve being put in a dungeon."

Seeing that the interpretation was favorable, the chief baker shared his dream: "I had a dream where I was carrying three baskets of white bread on my head. In the top basket were all kinds of baked goods for Pharaoh, but the birds were eating them out of the basket on my head." Joseph interpreted, "The three baskets are three days. In three days, Pharaoh will execute you and hang you on a tree, and the birds will eat your flesh."

On the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, he held a feast for all his servants. He restored the chief butler to his position, so he once again placed the cup in Pharaoh's hand. But he executed the chief baker, just as Joseph had interpreted. However, the chief butler forgot about Joseph and did not mention him to Pharaoh.

Two years later, Pharaoh had a dream in which he was standing by the Nile. Seven healthy, well-fed cows came up out of the river and grazed among the reeds. Then seven other cows, ugly and gaunt, came up out of the Nile and stood beside the healthy cows. The gaunt cows ate up the healthy cows, but after eating them, they looked just as bad as before. Pharaoh woke up, but then he fell asleep again and had a second dream. In this dream, seven heads of grain, healthy and good, were growing on a single stalk. After them, seven other heads of grain sprouted, thin and scorched by the east wind. The thin heads of grain swallowed up the healthy ones. Pharaoh woke up and realized it was a dream.

In the morning, Pharaoh was troubled, so he called for all the magicians and wise men of Egypt. He told them his dreams, but no one could interpret them. Then the chief butler spoke up, "Today I remember my shortcomings. Pharaoh was once angry with his servants, and he imprisoned me and the chief baker. We both had dreams on the same night, and a young Hebrew, a servant of the captain of the guard, interpreted our dreams. Everything happened just as he said: I was restored to my position, and the baker was executed."

Pharaoh sent for Joseph, who was quickly brought from the dungeon. After shaving and changing his clothes, Joseph appeared before Pharaoh. Pharaoh said, "I had a dream, and no one can interpret it. But I have heard that you can interpret dreams." Joseph replied, "I cannot do it, but God will give Pharaoh the answer he desires."

Pharaoh recounted his dreams to Joseph. Joseph explained, "Pharaoh's dreams are one and the same. God has revealed to Pharaoh what He is about to do. The seven healthy cows and the seven good heads of grain represent seven years of abundance. The seven gaunt cows and the seven thin heads of grain represent seven years of famine. The famine will follow the years of abundance and will be so severe that the abundance will be forgotten. The reason the dream was given to Pharaoh in two forms is that the matter has been firmly decided by God, and He will do it soon.

Now, let Pharaoh look for a discerning and wise man and put him in charge of the land of Egypt. Let Pharaoh appoint commissioners to take a fifth of the harvest during the seven years of abundance. They should collect all the food and store it under Pharaoh's authority, to be kept in the cities for food. This will be a reserve for the country, to be used during the seven years of famine, so the land will not be ruined by the famine."

Pharaoh and all his officials approved of Joseph's plan. Pharaoh said to his officials, "Can we find anyone like this man, one in whom is the spirit of God?" He said to Joseph, "Since God has made all this known to you, there is no one as discerning and wise as you. You shall be in charge of my palace, and all my people are to submit to your orders. Only with respect to the throne will I be greater than you." Pharaoh put Joseph in charge of the whole land of Egypt, gave him his signet ring, dressed him in fine linen, and put a gold chain around his neck. He had Joseph ride in a chariot as his second-in-command, and people shouted before him, "Make way!" Thus, Joseph was put in charge of the entire land of Egypt. Pharaoh also gave Joseph the name Zaphenath-Paneah and gave him Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, as his wife. Joseph traveled throughout Egypt, overseeing the land.Joseph named his first son Manasseh, saying, "God has made me forget all my hardship and my father's house." He named his second son Ephraim, saying, "God has made me fruitful in the land of my suffering."

The seven years of abundance in Egypt ended, and the seven years of famine began, just as Joseph had predicted. There was famine in all the lands, but Egypt had bread. When the people of Egypt were starving, they cried out to Pharaoh for food. Pharaoh told them, "Go to Joseph and do what he tells you."

Joseph opened all the storehouses and sold grain to the Egyptians, as the famine was severe throughout Egypt. People from all over the world came to Egypt to buy grain from Joseph because the famine was severe everywhere.

Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt and said to his sons, "Why are you just looking at each other? I have heard there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy some for us so that we may live and not die." So, Joseph's ten brothers went to buy grain in Egypt, but Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph's brother, because he feared harm might come to him.

The sons of Israel were among those who came to buy grain, for the famine was in Canaan as well. Joseph was the governor of the land and the one who sold grain to all its people. When Joseph's brothers arrived, they bowed down to him with their faces to the ground. Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him. He spoke harshly to them and accused them of being spies. They insisted they were honest men, not spies, and explained they were twelve brothers, sons of one man in Canaan. They said the youngest was with their father, and one was no more.

Joseph continued to accuse them of being spies and said they would be tested. He told them they would not leave unless their youngest brother came to Egypt. He put them in custody for three days. On the third day, Joseph said, "Do this and live, for I fear God. If you are honest men, let one of your brothers stay here in prison while the rest of you go and take grain back to your starving households. But you must bring your youngest brother to me so that your words may be verified and you may not die." They agreed.

They said to each other, "Surely we are being punished because of our brother. We saw his distress when he pleaded with us, but we would not listen; that's why this distress has come upon us." Reuben replied, "Didn't I tell you not to sin against the boy? But you wouldn't listen. Now we must account for his blood." They did not realize that Joseph could understand them, as he was using an interpreter.

Joseph turned away from them and wept. When he returned, he took Simeon from them and bound him before their eyes. Joseph gave orders to fill their bags with grain, return each man's silver to his sack, and give them provisions for their journey. They loaded their donkeys with the grain and left.

At the place where they stopped for the night, one of them opened his sack to feed his donkey and saw his silver in the mouth of the sack. He told his brothers, "My silver has been returned; here it is in my sack." Their hearts sank, and they turned to each other trembling, saying, "What is this that God has done to us?"

When they returned to their father Jacob in Canaan, they told him everything that had happened. They explained how the man who was the lord of the land had spoken harshly to them and accused them of being spies. They recounted how they had told him they were honest men, twelve brothers, sons of one father, and that the youngest was with their father in Canaan while one was no more. The man had told them to bring their youngest brother to prove they were not spies and to leave one brother with him while taking grain back to their households.

As they emptied their sacks, each man found his bundle of silver in his sack. When they and their father saw the bundles of silver, they were frightened. Jacob said to them, "You have deprived me of my children. Joseph is no more, Simeon is no more, and now you want to take Benjamin. Everything is against me!"

Reuben said to his father, "You may put both of my sons to death if I do not bring him back to you. Entrust him to my care, and I will bring him back." But Jacob replied, "My son will not go down there with you; his brother is dead, and he is the only one left. If harm comes to him on the journey you are taking, you will bring my gray head down to the grave in sorrow."

When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he told the steward of his house, "Take these men to my house, slaughter an animal, and prepare a meal; they are to eat with me at noon." The steward did as Joseph said and brought the men to Joseph's house. The brothers were frightened because they were brought to Joseph's house. They thought it was because of the silver that was put back into their sacks the first time, and they feared he would seize them and make them slaves.

They approached the steward and explained how they had found their silver in their sacks and had brought it back with them, along with more silver to buy food. The steward reassured them, saying, "It's all right. Don't be afraid. Your God, the God of your father, has given you treasure in your sacks; I received your silver." Then he brought Simeon out to them.

The steward took the men into Joseph's house, gave them water to wash their feet, and provided fodder for their donkeys. They prepared their gifts for Joseph's arrival at noon because they had heard they were to eat there.

Joseph instructed his steward to fill the men's sacks with as much food as they could carry and to put each man's silver in the mouth of his sack. He also told him to put his silver cup in the sack of the youngest, along with the silver for his grain. The steward did as Joseph instructed.

At dawn, the men were sent on their way with their donkeys. After they had left the city and had not gone far, Joseph told his steward, "Go after those men and when you catch up with them, say, 'Why have you repaid good with evil? Isn't this the cup my master drinks from and also uses for divination? This is a wicked thing you have done.'"

The steward caught up with them and repeated these words. The brothers replied, "Why does my lord say such things? Far be it from your servants to do anything like that! We even brought back to you from Canaan the silver we found in our sacks. So why would we steal silver or gold from your master's house? If any of your servants is found to have it, he will die, and the rest of us will become my lord's slaves."

The steward said, "Very well, then. Let it be as you say. Whoever is found to have the cup will become my slave; the rest of you will be free from blame." Each of them quickly lowered his sack to the ground and opened it. The steward searched, beginning with the oldest and ending with the youngest, and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack. At this, they tore their clothes in despair, loaded their donkeys, and returned to the city.

The famine was severe in the land, and when they had eaten all the grain they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them, "Go back and buy us a little more food." Judah reminded him that the man had warned them they would not see his face unless their youngest brother was with them. He said, "If you send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for you. But if you will not send him, we will not go down, because the man said to us, 'You will not see my face unless your brother is with you.'"Israel (Jacob) asked his sons why they had told the man in Egypt about having another brother. They explained that the man had asked them directly about their family, and they had no way of knowing he would demand to see their youngest brother. Judah then urged his father to send Benjamin with them so they could go back to Egypt and get more food, promising to take full responsibility for his safety.

Jacob finally agreed, telling them to take gifts and double the money to return what was found in their sacks, hoping it was a mistake. He prayed for God's mercy so that the man would release Simeon and Benjamin. The brothers took the gifts, money, and Benjamin, and went to Egypt to see Joseph.

When Joseph saw Benjamin, he instructed his steward to prepare a meal for them. The brothers were nervous, thinking they were in trouble over the money found in their sacks. They explained the situation to the steward, who reassured them and brought Simeon out to them. They prepared their gifts and waited for Joseph.

When Joseph arrived, they presented their gifts and bowed to him. He asked about their father and was moved when he saw Benjamin. Overcome with emotion, Joseph left the room to weep. After composing himself, he returned and ordered the meal to be served. The brothers were seated according to their ages, and they were amazed. Benjamin received five times more food than the others, and they all enjoyed the meal together.

Later, Joseph had his steward fill their sacks with food and secretly place his silver cup in Benjamin's sack. The next morning, the brothers left, but Joseph sent his steward to confront them about the missing cup. The brothers denied stealing it and offered to become slaves if the cup was found with any of them. The steward found the cup in Benjamin's sack, and the brothers returned to the city in despair.

Judah pleaded with Joseph, explaining their father's deep attachment to Benjamin and the devastating impact it would have if Benjamin did not return. He offered to stay as a slave in Benjamin's place. Joseph, unable to contain his emotions, revealed his identity to his brothers. He assured them that their actions were part of God's plan to save lives during the famine. He urged them to bring their father and families to Egypt, where he could provide for them.

The brothers returned to Canaan and told Jacob that Joseph was alive and ruling Egypt. Initially, Jacob couldn't believe it, but when he saw the wagons Joseph had sent, his spirit revived, and he decided to go see Joseph before he died.Jacob traveled to Beer-sheba and offered sacrifices to the God of his father, Isaac. That night, God spoke to Israel in a vision, calling him by name. Jacob responded, "Here I am." God reassured him, saying, "I am God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go to Egypt, for I will make you a great nation there. I will go with you to Egypt and will surely bring you back again. Joseph will close your eyes when you die."

Jacob left Beer-sheba, and his sons carried him, their children, and their wives in the wagons Pharaoh had sent. They took their livestock and possessions from Canaan and went to Egypt. Jacob brought all his descendants with him, including his sons, grandsons, daughters, and granddaughters.

Jacob sent Judah ahead to Joseph to get directions to Goshen. When they arrived, Joseph prepared his chariot and went to meet his father in Goshen. He embraced Jacob and wept for a long time. Jacob said to Joseph, "Now I can die in peace, having seen your face and knowing you are alive."

Joseph informed Pharaoh that his family had arrived from Canaan with their flocks and herds. He presented five of his brothers to Pharaoh, who asked about their occupation. They replied that they were shepherds, as were their ancestors, and requested to live in Goshen due to the severe famine in Canaan. Pharaoh granted their request and offered them the best land in Egypt, suggesting that capable men among them could oversee his livestock.

Jacob and his sons, along with their families, settled in Egypt. Joseph provided them with food according to their needs. The famine was severe, and soon all the money in Egypt and Canaan was spent on grain. When the people ran out of money, they traded their livestock for food. The following year, they offered their land and themselves in exchange for food, becoming Pharaoh's servants. Joseph bought all the land in Egypt for Pharaoh, except for the land of the priests, who had a special provision from Pharaoh.

Joseph gave the people seed to plant and established a law that a fifth of the harvest would go to Pharaoh, while the rest would be for their own use. The people were grateful, acknowledging that Joseph had saved their lives.

Jacob lived in Egypt for seventeen years, reaching the age of 147. As he neared death, Joseph brought his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, to see him. Jacob recounted God's promise to make his descendants a great nation and to give them the land of Canaan as an everlasting possession.Jacob continued, "Your future children will be yours, but Ephraim and Manasseh will be mine, just like Reuben and Simeon. When I was coming from Paddan, Rachel died in Canaan on the way to Ephrath, and I buried her there, which is Bethlehem."

Jacob then called his sons together and said, "Gather around so I can tell you what will happen in the future. Listen, sons of Jacob, listen to Israel, your father. Reuben, you are my firstborn, my strength, and the first sign of my vigor, excelling in honor and power. But you are as unstable as water, and you will not excel because you defiled your father's bed.

Simeon and Levi are brothers; their swords are weapons of violence. Let me not enter their council or join their assembly, for they have killed men in their anger and hamstrung oxen as they pleased. Cursed be their anger, so fierce, and their fury, so cruel! I will scatter them in Jacob and disperse them in Israel.

Judah, your brothers will praise you; your hand will be on the neck of your enemies, and your father's sons will bow down to you. You are a lion's cub, Judah; you return from the prey, my son. Like a lion, he crouches and lies down, like a lioness—who dares to rouse him? The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet, until he to whom it belongs shall come, and the obedience of the nations shall be his. He will tether his donkey to a vine, his colt to the choicest branch; he will wash his garments in wine, his robes in the blood of grapes. His eyes will be darker than wine, his teeth whiter than milk.

Zebulun will live by the seashore and become a haven for ships; his border will extend toward Sidon. Issachar is a rawboned donkey lying down among the sheep pens. When he sees how good is his resting place and how pleasant is his land, he will bend his shoulder to the burden and submit to forced labor.

Dan will provide justice for his people as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan will be a snake by the roadside, a viper along the path that bites the horse's heels so that its rider tumbles backward. I look for your deliverance, Lord.

Gad will be attacked by a band of raiders, but he will attack them at their heels. Asher's food will be rich; he will provide delicacies fit for a king. Naphtali is a doe set free that bears beautiful fawns.

Joseph is a fruitful vine, a fruitful vine near a spring, whose branches climb over a wall. With bitterness, archers attacked him; they shot at him with hostility. But his bow remained steady, his strong arms stayed limber, because of the hand of the Mighty One of Jacob, because of the Shepherd, the Rock of Israel, because of your father's God, who helps you, because of the Almighty, who blesses you with blessings of the skies above, blessings of the deep springs below, blessings of the breast and womb. Your father's blessings are greater than the blessings of the ancient mountains, than the bounty of the age-old hills. Let all these rest on the head of Joseph, on the brow of the prince among his brothers.

Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; in the morning he devours the prey, in the evening he divides the plunder."

All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father said to them when he blessed them, giving each the blessing appropriate to him.

Jacob then instructed them, "I am about to be gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave in the field of Ephron the Hittite, the cave in the field of Machpelah, near Mamre in Canaan, which Abraham bought along with the field as a burial place from Ephron the Hittite. There Abraham and his wife Sarah were buried, there Isaac and his wife Rebekah were buried, and there I buried Leah. The field and the cave in it were bought from the Hittites."

When Jacob had finished giving instructions to his sons, he drew his feet up into the bed, breathed his last, and was gathered to his people.

Joseph threw himself on his father's face and wept over him and kissed him. Then Joseph directed the physicians in his service to embalm his father Israel. So the physicians embalmed him, taking a full forty days, for that was the time required for embalming. And the Egyptians mourned for him seventy days.

When the days of mourning had passed, Joseph said to Pharaoh's court, "If I have found favor in your eyes, speak to Pharaoh for me. Tell him, 'My father made me swear an oath and said, "I am about to die; bury me in the tomb I dug for myself in the land of Canaan." Now let me go up and bury my father; then I will return.'"

Pharaoh said, "Go up and bury your father, as he made you swear to do."

So Joseph went up to bury his father. All Pharaoh's officials accompanied him—the dignitaries of his court and all the dignitaries of Egypt—besides all the members of Joseph's household and his brothers and those belonging to his father's household. Only their children and their flocks and herds were left in Goshen. Chariots and horsemen also went up with him. It was a very large company.

When they reached the threshing floor of Atad, near the Jordan, they lamented loudly and bitterly; and there Joseph observed a seven-day period of mourning for his father. When the Canaanites who lived there saw the mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, they said, "The Egyptians are holding a solemn ceremony of mourning." That is why that place near the Jordan is called Abel Mizraim.

So Jacob's sons did as he had commanded them: They carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave in the field of Machpelah, near Mamre, which Abraham had bought along with the field as a burial place from Ephron the Hittite. After burying his father, Joseph returned to Egypt, together with his brothers and all the others who had gone with him to bury his father.

When Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, "What if Joseph holds a grudge against us and pays us back for all the wrongs we did to him?"Joseph's brothers sent him a message saying, "Before he died, your father commanded us to tell you to forgive your brothers for their sins and the wrongs they did to you." When Joseph received this message, he wept. His brothers then came and bowed down before him, saying, "We are your servants." Joseph reassured them, saying, "Don't be afraid. Am I in the place of God? You intended to harm me, but God intended it for good, to accomplish what is now being done, the saving of many lives. So don't be afraid. I will provide for you and your children." He comforted them and spoke kindly to them.

Joseph stayed in Egypt with his father's family and lived to be 110 years old. He saw the third generation of Ephraim's children and the children of Machir, son of Manasseh, who were placed on his knees. Before he died, Joseph told his brothers, "I am about to die, but God will surely come to your aid and take you up out of this land to the land He promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." Joseph made the Israelites swear an oath, saying, "God will surely come to your aid, and then you must carry my bones up from this place." Joseph died at the age of 110, and after they embalmed him, he was placed in a coffin in Egypt.

The book of Exodus begins with the names of the sons of Israel who came to Egypt with Jacob, each with his household: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, Benjamin, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. The total number of Jacob's descendants was seventy, and Joseph was already in Egypt. Joseph and all his brothers and that entire generation died, but the Israelites were fruitful and multiplied greatly, becoming exceedingly numerous, so the land was filled with them.

A man from the house of Levi married a Levite woman, and she gave birth to a son. Seeing that he was a fine child, she hid him for three months. When she could hide him no longer, she placed him in a papyrus basket coated with tar and pitch and set it among the reeds along the bank of the Nile. The baby's sister stood at a distance to see what would happen to him. Pharaoh's daughter went down to the Nile to bathe, and her attendants were walking along the riverbank. She saw the basket among the reeds and sent her female slave to get it. She opened it and saw the baby. He was crying, and she felt sorry for him, saying, "This is one of the Hebrew babies." The baby's sister asked Pharaoh's daughter, "Shall I go and get one of the Hebrew women to nurse the baby for you?" "Yes, go," she answered. So the girl went and got the baby's mother. Pharaoh's daughter said to her, "Take this baby and nurse him for me, and I will pay you." So the woman took the baby and nursed him. When the child grew older, she took him to Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. She named him Moses, saying, "I drew him out of the water."

A new king, who did not know about Joseph, came to power in Egypt. He said to his people, "The Israelites have become too numerous and too powerful for us. We must deal shrewdly with them, or they will become even more numerous, and if war breaks out, they will join our enemies, fight against us, and leave the country." So they put slave masters over them to oppress them with forced labor, and they built Pithom and Rameses as store cities for Pharaoh. But the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied and spread; so the Egyptians came to dread the Israelites and worked them ruthlessly. TheyMoses asked God, "What if they don't believe me or listen to me and say, 'The Lord did not appear to you'?" God replied, "What is that in your hand?" Moses answered, "A staff." God said, "Throw it on the ground." When Moses did, it turned into a snake, and he ran from it. Then God told him, "Reach out your hand and take it by the tail." Moses did so, and it turned back into a staff. God explained, "This is so they may believe that the Lord, the God of their ancestors—Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—has appeared to you."

God then instructed Moses to put his hand inside his cloak. When Moses took it out, his hand was leprous, white as snow. God told him to put his hand back into his cloak, and when he did, it was restored. God said, "If they do not believe you or pay attention to the first sign, they may believe the second. If they still do not believe, take some water from the Nile and pour it on the dry ground. The water will become blood on the ground."

Moses expressed his concern about his speaking abilities, saying, "I am not eloquent; I am slow of speech and tongue." God reassured him, "Who gave human beings their mouths? Who makes them deaf or mute? Is it not I, the Lord? Now go; I will help you speak and teach you what to say." Moses still hesitated, asking God to send someone else. God became angry but said, "What about your brother Aaron the Levite? I know he can speak well. He is already on his way to meet you, and he will be glad to see you. You shall speak to him and put words in his mouth; I will help both of you speak and will teach you what to do. He will speak to the people for you, and it will be as if he were your mouth and you were God to him. But take this staff in your hand so you can perform the signs with it."

Moses returned to his father-in-law Jethro and asked for permission to go back to Egypt to see if his people were still alive. Jethro said, "Go in peace." The Lord told Moses in Midian, "Go back to Egypt, for all those who wanted to kill you are dead." So Moses took his wife and sons, put them on a donkey, and started back to Egypt, carrying the staff of God.

The Lord instructed Aaron to meet Moses in the wilderness. When they met, Moses told Aaron everything the Lord had said and the signs He had commanded him to perform. They gathered all the elders of the Israelites, and Aaron told them everything the Lord had said to Moses. He also performed the signs before the people, and they believed. When they heard that the Lord was concerned about them and had seen their misery, they bowed down and worshipped.

Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said, "This is what the Lord, the God of Israel, says: 'Let my people go, so that they may hold a festival to me in the wilderness.'" Pharaoh responded, "Who is the Lord, that I should obey him and let Israel go? I do not know the Lord and will not let Israel go." They insisted, "The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Let us take a three-day journey into the wilderness to offer sacrifices to the Lord our God, or he may strike us with plagues or the sword." Pharaoh accused them of distracting the people from their work and ordered them back to their labor.

Pharaoh commanded the slave drivers and overseers not to supply the Israelites with straw for making bricks, forcing them to gather their own straw while maintaining their quota of bricks. The Israelites scattered throughout Egypt to gather stubble for straw, and the slave drivers kept pressing them, saying, "Complete the work required of you each day, just as when you had straw." The Israelite overseers were beaten and questioned about their failure to meet the quota.

The overseers appealed to Pharaoh, explaining that they were not given straw but were still required to make bricks. Pharaoh accused them of being lazy and insisted they continue working without reducing the quota. The overseers realized they were in trouble when they were told they must not reduce the number of bricks required each day.

As they left Pharaoh, they found Moses and Aaron waiting for them. They said, "May the Lord look on you and judge you! You have made us obnoxious to Pharaoh and his officials and have put a sword in their hand to kill us." The Lord then spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell Pharaoh to let the Israelites go out of his land. Moses expressed his doubt, saying, "If the Israelites will not listen to me, why would Pharaoh listen to me, since I speak with faltering lips?"Moses questioned God, saying, "Why have you brought trouble upon this people? Ever since I went to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has only made things worse for them, and You have not delivered Your people at all." The Lord responded, "Now you will see what I will do to Pharaoh. Because of my powerful hand, he will let them go; indeed, he will drive them out of his land."

God then spoke to Moses and Aaron, instructing them to lead the Israelites out of Egypt. He reminded Moses of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and assured him that He had heard the cries of the Israelites and would deliver them from their suffering. God promised to bring them to the land He had sworn to give to their ancestors.

Moses relayed this message to the Israelites, but they did not listen due to their broken spirit and harsh slavery. God reiterated His command to Moses and Aaron to speak to Pharaoh and demand the release of the Israelites.

Despite Moses' doubts about his speaking abilities, God reassured him and instructed him to speak to Pharaoh. God warned that He would harden Pharaoh's heart, but through many signs and wonders, He would bring the Israelites out of Egypt.

Moses and Aaron followed God's commands, performing miracles before Pharaoh. However, Pharaoh's magicians replicated some of these signs, and Pharaoh's heart remained hardened. God continued to instruct Moses and Aaron on the next steps, including turning the Nile's water into blood and bringing plagues upon Egypt to compel Pharaoh to release the Israelites.

Despite the increasing severity of the plagues, Pharaoh's heart remained stubborn, and he refused to let the people go. Each time, Moses and Aaron followed God's instructions, demonstrating His power and authority, but Pharaoh continued to resist, leading to further plagues and suffering for the Egyptians.Pharaoh saw there was relief and hardened his heart, ignoring Moses and Aaron as the Lord had said. The Lord then told Moses to instruct Aaron to stretch out his rod and strike the dust of the earth, turning it into gnats throughout Egypt. Aaron did so, and gnats infested people and animals. The magicians tried to replicate this but failed, admitting it was the work of God. Yet, Pharaoh's heart remained hardened.

The Lord told Moses to confront Pharaoh again, demanding the release of the Israelites. If Pharaoh refused, swarms of flies would infest Egypt, sparing only the land of Goshen where the Israelites lived. The flies came, and Egypt was ruined. Pharaoh offered a compromise, allowing sacrifices within Egypt, but Moses insisted on a three-day journey into the wilderness. Pharaoh agreed but later reneged, hardening his heart again.

The Lord then warned of a severe plague on Egyptian livestock, sparing Israelite animals. The next day, all Egyptian livestock died, but Pharaoh remained stubborn. The Lord instructed Moses and Aaron to take soot and throw it into the air, causing boils on Egyptians and their animals. The magicians couldn't stand before Moses due to the boils, but Pharaoh's heart was still hardened.

The Lord warned of a devastating hailstorm, urging Egyptians to shelter their livestock. Those who feared the Lord heeded the warning, while others did not. The storm came, destroying everything in the fields except in Goshen. Pharaoh admitted his sin and asked Moses to pray for the storm to stop, promising to let the Israelites go. Moses prayed, the storm ceased, but Pharaoh hardened his heart again.

The Lord then warned of a locust plague. Pharaoh's servants urged him to release the Israelites, but Pharaoh only allowed the men to go. Moses insisted everyone must go, and Pharaoh drove them out. The Lord sent locusts, covering Egypt and consuming all remaining crops. Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron, admitting his sin and asking for the locusts to be removed. Moses prayed, and the locusts were blown away, but Pharaoh's heart remained hardened.When Pharaoh saw that the rain, hail, and thunder had stopped, he sinned again and hardened his heart, along with his servants. Pharaoh's heart remained hardened, and he did not let the Israelites go, just as the Lord had foretold through Moses.

The Lord instructed Moses to stretch out his hand over Egypt to bring a plague of locusts that would consume all the remaining crops. Moses did as instructed, and an east wind brought the locusts, which covered the land and devoured everything left by the hail. Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron, admitted his sin, and asked for forgiveness, pleading for the locusts to be removed. Moses prayed, and the Lord sent a strong west wind that drove the locusts into the Red Sea, leaving no locusts in Egypt. However, Pharaoh's heart was hardened again, and he did not let the Israelites go.

The Lord then told Moses to stretch out his hand toward the sky to bring darkness over Egypt, a darkness that could be felt. Moses did so, and thick darkness covered Egypt for three days. The Israelites, however, had light in their dwellings. Pharaoh called Moses and offered to let the people go, but insisted they leave their flocks and herds behind. Moses refused, stating that they needed their livestock for sacrifices. Pharaoh's heart was hardened once more, and he threatened Moses, saying he would kill him if he saw him again. Moses agreed, saying he would not see Pharaoh's face again.

The Lord told Moses that one more plague would come upon Pharaoh and Egypt, after which Pharaoh would let the Israelites go. The Lord instructed Moses to tell the Israelites to ask their Egyptian neighbors for silver and gold. The Lord gave the Israelites favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. Moses warned Pharaoh that at midnight, the Lord would strike down all the firstborn in Egypt, from Pharaoh's firstborn to the firstborn of the maidservant and all the firstborn of the cattle. There would be a great cry throughout Egypt, but the Israelites would be spared. Pharaoh's servants would then beg Moses and the Israelites to leave.

The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron in Egypt, telling them that the current month would be the first month of the year for them. On the tenth day of the month, each household was to take a lamb, and if a household was too small, they could share with their neighbor. The lamb had to be without blemish, a male of the first year, taken from the sheep or goats. They were to keep it until the fourteenth day and then kill it at dusk. They were to take some of the blood and put it on the doorposts and lintel of their houses. They were to eat the lamb that night, roasted with fire, along with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. They were not to leave any of it until morning, and any leftovers were to be burned.

The Lord would pass through Egypt that night and strike down all the firstborn, but when He saw the blood on the doorposts, He would pass over those houses, sparing them from the plague. This day would be a memorial for the Israelites, to be kept as a feast to the Lord for generations. For seven days, they were to eat unleavened bread and remove all leaven from their houses. The first and seventh days were to be holy convocations, with no work done except for preparing food. This feast was to be observed as a lasting ordinance.

Moses instructed the elders of Israel to select and kill the Passover lambs, and to use hyssop to apply the blood to their doorposts. They were to stay inside their houses until morning, as the Lord would pass through to strike down the Egyptians but would pass over the houses with blood on the doorposts. This observance was to be kept forever, and when their children asked about its meaning, they were to explain that it was the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, commemorating how the Lord spared the Israelites' houses when He struck down the Egyptians. The Israelites did as the Lord commanded through Moses and Aaron.

At midnight, the Lord struck down all the firstborn in Egypt, from Pharaoh's firstborn to the firstborn of the prisoners and the firstborn of the cattle. The Israelites followed the Lord's instructions and were spared.The Israelites followed Moses' instructions and asked the Egyptians for silver, gold, and clothing. The Lord made the Egyptians favorably disposed towards the Israelites, so they gave them what they requested, effectively plundering the Egyptians.

That night, Pharaoh and all the Egyptians woke up to a great cry throughout Egypt because there was not a single house without someone dead. Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron during the night and told them to leave Egypt with all the Israelites and their livestock, and to bless him as well.

The Israelites, about six hundred thousand men plus women and children, left Rameses and journeyed to Succoth. A mixed multitude also went with them, along with large flocks and herds. The Egyptians urged the Israelites to leave quickly, fearing they would all die. The Israelites took their unleavened dough and carried their kneading bowls wrapped in their clothing.

They baked unleavened bread from the dough they had brought out of Egypt because they were driven out and had no time to prepare food. The Israelites had lived in Egypt for 430 years, and on the very day the 430 years ended, all the Lord's people left Egypt. This night was to be remembered and kept as a vigil to the Lord for bringing them out of Egypt.

Moses reminded the people to remember this day when the Lord brought them out of Egypt, and to eat no leavened bread. The Lord gave Moses and Aaron instructions for the Passover: no foreigner may eat it, but any slave bought with money may eat it after being circumcised. It must be eaten in one house, and none of the meat should be taken outside or have any bones broken. The whole community of Israel must celebrate it. If a foreigner living among them wants to celebrate the Passover, all the males in his household must be circumcised, and then he may participate. The same law applies to both native-born and foreigners living among them.

The Israelites did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron. On that very day, the Lord brought the Israelites out of Egypt by their divisions.

The Lord told Moses to consecrate every firstborn male, both human and animal, to Him. When the Lord brings them into the land of the Canaanites, they are to dedicate the firstborn males to the Lord. They must redeem every firstborn donkey with a lamb, and if not redeemed, break its neck. Every firstborn son must be redeemed. When their children ask why they do this, they should explain that it is because the Lord brought them out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and that is why they sacrifice the firstborn males to the Lord and redeem their sons.

When Pharaoh finally let the people go, God did not lead them through the land of the Philistines, though it was shorter, because He thought they might change their minds if they faced war and return to Egypt. Instead, He led them through the desert toward the Red Sea. The Israelites left Egypt armed for battle. Moses took Joseph's bones with him, as Joseph had made the Israelites swear to do. They traveled from Succoth and camped at Etham on the edge of the desert. The Lord went ahead of them in a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night to guide them.

The Lord instructed Moses to have the Israelites turn back and camp near Pi Hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, to make Pharaoh think they were wandering in confusion. The Lord would harden Pharaoh's heart, and he would pursue them, but the Lord would gain glory through Pharaoh and his army, and the Egyptians would know that He is the Lord. The Israelites did as they were told.

When Pharaoh was told that the Israelites had fled, he and his officials changed their minds and pursued them with all the chariots of Egypt, including six hundred of the best chariots. The Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he chased after the Israelites, who were marching out boldly. As Pharaoh approached, the Israelites saw the Egyptians coming after them and were terrified. They cried out to the Lord and complained to Moses, asking why he brought them out of Egypt to die in the desert. Moses told them not to be afraid and to stand firm, as the Lord would deliver them and they would never see the Egyptians again. The Lord would fight for them, and they needed only to be still.

The angel of God, who had been traveling in front of Israel's army, moved behind them, and the pillar of cloud also moved behind them, coming between the armies of Egypt and Israel. Throughout the night, the cloud brought darkness to one side and light to the other, so neither army went near the other all night long. Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the Lord drove the sea back with a strong east wind, turning it into dry land. The waters were divided, and the Israelites went through the sea on dry ground, with a wall of water on their right and left. The Egyptians pursued them, but the Lord looked down from the pillar of fire and cloud and threw the Egyptian army into confusion. He jammed the wheels of their chariots, making it difficult for them to drive. The Egyptians realized that the Lord was fighting for Israel and tried to flee.The Israelites left Egypt confidently. Pharaoh's army, including his chariots and horsemen, pursued them and caught up with them by the sea near Pi-hahiroth, opposite Baal-zephon. When Pharaoh approached, the Israelites were terrified and cried out to the Lord. They complained to Moses, asking why he brought them out of Egypt to die in the desert.

The Lord told Moses to stop crying out and to tell the Israelites to move forward. He instructed Moses to lift his staff and stretch out his hand over the sea to divide the waters so the Israelites could walk through on dry ground. The Lord said He would harden the hearts of the Egyptians so they would follow, and He would gain glory through Pharaoh and his army.

Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the Lord drove the sea back with a strong east wind, turning it into dry land. The Israelites walked through the sea on dry ground, with walls of water on both sides. The Egyptians pursued them, but the Lord threw their army into confusion. He jammed the wheels of their chariots, making it difficult for them to drive. The Egyptians realized the Lord was fighting for Israel and tried to flee.

The Lord told Moses to stretch out his hand over the sea again, and the waters returned, covering the chariots and horsemen of Pharaoh's army. Not one of them survived. The Israelites saw the Egyptians dead on the shore and feared the Lord, putting their trust in Him and in Moses.

Moses and the Israelites sang a song to the Lord, praising Him for His power and for throwing Pharaoh's chariots and army into the sea. They celebrated the Lord's victory and His protection.

Moses led the Israelites from the Red Sea into the wilderness of Shur. After three days without finding water, they came to Marah, but the water was bitter. The people complained to Moses, and the Lord showed him a piece of wood to throw into the water, making it sweet. The Lord made a decree and a law for them there, promising that if they obeyed His commands, He would not bring on them any of the diseases He brought on the Egyptians.

They then came to Elim, where there were twelve springs and seventy palm trees, and they camped there. From Elim, they journeyed to the wilderness of Sin, where the whole community grumbled against Moses and Aaron, wishing they had died in Egypt where they had plenty of food. The Lord told Moses He would rain down bread from heaven for them to gather daily, testing their obedience.

The Israelites gathered the bread, called manna, each morning. On the sixth day, they gathered twice as much to prepare for the Sabbath. Some disobeyed and tried to gather on the Sabbath, but found none. The Lord reminded them to keep His commandments and laws, and to rest on the Sabbath.The Israelites rested on the seventh day. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, "I have heard the complaints of the Israelites. Tell them that at dusk they will eat meat, and in the morning they will be filled with bread. Then they will know that I am the Lord their God."

That evening, quails came and covered the camp, and in the morning, there was a layer of dew around the camp. When the dew evaporated, a fine, flaky substance appeared on the ground, which the Israelites did not recognize. Moses told them, "This is the bread the Lord has given you to eat."

The Israelites called it manna. It was white like coriander seed and tasted like wafers made with honey. Moses instructed them to keep an omer of it for future generations to see the bread the Lord provided in the wilderness when He brought them out of Egypt. Aaron placed the manna before the Testimony as the Lord commanded.

The Israelites ate manna for forty years until they reached the borders of Canaan. An omer is a tenth of an ephah.

The Israelites journeyed from the wilderness of Sin and camped at Rephidim, where there was no water. They quarreled with Moses, demanding water. Moses asked why they were testing the Lord. The people complained about being brought out of Egypt to die of thirst. Moses cried out to the Lord, who instructed him to take his staff and strike a rock at Horeb, from which water would flow. Moses did so in the presence of the elders, and the place was named Massah and Meribah because the Israelites quarreled and tested the Lord.

Amalek then attacked Israel at Rephidim. Moses told Joshua to choose men to fight while he stood on a hill with the rod of God. As long as Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed. When he lowered them, Amalek prevailed. Aaron and Hur supported Moses' hands until sunset, and Joshua defeated Amalek.

The Lord instructed Moses to write this as a memorial and to tell Joshua that He would blot out Amalek's memory. Moses built an altar named Adonai-nissi, declaring that the Lord would be at war with Amalek for generations.

Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, heard of God's deeds and brought Moses' wife Zipporah and their two sons to him. Moses recounted all that the Lord had done, and Jethro rejoiced, praising the Lord. Jethro offered sacrifices, and they ate together.

The next day, Jethro observed Moses judging the people alone and advised him to delegate the task to capable men who feared God and hated dishonest gain. Moses followed this advice, appointing leaders over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens to judge the people, bringing only the difficult cases to Moses. Jethro then returned to his own land.

In the third month after leaving Egypt, the Israelites arrived at the wilderness of Sinai and camped before the mountain. Moses went up to God, who instructed him to tell the Israelites that if they obeyed His covenant, they would be His treasured possession and a holy nation. The people agreed, and Moses conveyed their words to the Lord.

The Lord told Moses He would come in a thick cloud so the people could hear Him and believe Moses. He instructed Moses to sanctify the people and have them wash their garments in preparation for the third day when the Lord would descend on Mount Sinai.On the third day, the Lord will come down in front of all the people on Mount Sinai. Moses went down from the mountain to the people, sanctified them, and they washed their clothes. He told them to be ready for the third day and to abstain from sexual relations.

Moses set boundaries around the mountain, warning the people not to go up or touch its edge, or they would be put to death. No one was to touch the person who crossed the boundary; they would be stoned or shot, whether human or animal. When the ram's horn sounded long, they could approach the mountain.

On the morning of the third day, there were thunders, lightnings, a thick cloud on the mountain, and a very loud trumpet sound, causing everyone in the camp to tremble. Moses led the people out of the camp to meet God, and they stood at the foot of the mountain. Mount Sinai was covered in smoke because the Lord descended on it in fire, and the whole mountain shook violently. The trumpet sound grew louder and louder, and Moses spoke, and God answered him with a voice.

The Lord came down on Mount Sinai, called Moses to the top, and Moses went up. The Lord told Moses to go down and warn the people not to force their way through to see the Lord, or many would perish. Even the priests who approached the Lord had to sanctify themselves, or the Lord would break out against them. Moses assured the Lord that the people could not come up because they had set boundaries around the mountain. The Lord told Moses to go down and bring Aaron back up with him, but the priests and the people must not break through to come up to the Lord, or He would break out against them. Moses went down and told the people.

The people saw the thunder, lightning, the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking, and they trembled and stood at a distance. They told Moses to speak to them instead of God, fearing they would die if God spoke to them directly. Moses reassured them not to be afraid, as God had come to test them so that the fear of Him would keep them from sinning. The people remained at a distance while Moses approached the thick darkness where God was.

God spoke all these words:

"I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. You shall have no other gods before Me. You shall not make for yourself an idol or any likeness of what is in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the waters under the earth. You shall not bow down to them or serve them, for I, the Lord your God, am a jealous God, punishing the children for the sin of the parents to the third and fourth generation of those who hate Me, but showing love to a thousand generations of those who love Me and keep My commandments.

"You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God, for the Lord will not hold anyone guiltless who misuses His name. Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy. Six days you shall labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it, you shall not do any work, neither you, nor your son or daughter, nor your male or female servant, nor your animals, nor any foreigner residing in your towns. For in six days, the Lord made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, but He rested on the seventh day. Therefore, the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy.

"Honor your father and your mother, so that you may live long in the land the Lord your God is giving you. You shall not murder. You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal. You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor. You shall not covet your neighbor's house. You shall not covet your neighbor's wife, or his male or female servant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor."

The Lord told Moses to tell the Israelites that they had seen for themselves that He had spoken to them from heaven. They were not to make gods of silver or gold to be alongside Him. They were to make an altar of earth for Him and sacrifice their burnt offerings and peace offerings, their sheep and oxen, on it. In every place where He caused His name to be remembered, He would come to them and bless them. If they made an altar of stone, they were not to use cut stones, for using a tool on it would profane it. They were not to go up to His altar by steps, so their nakedness would not be exposed.

These are the laws you are to set before them:

If you buy a Hebrew servant, he is to serve for six years, but in the seventh year, he shall go free without paying anything. If he comes alone, he is to go free alone; if he is married, his wife is to go with him. If his master gives him a wife and she bears him children, the wife and children belong to the master, and the man shall go free alone. But if the servant declares that he loves his master, his wife, and his children and does not want to go free, then his master must take him before the judges. He shall take him to the door or the doorpost and pierce his ear with an awl. Then he will be his servant for life.

If a man sells his daughter as a servant, she is not to go free as male servants do. If she does not please her master, who has selected her for himself, he must let her be redeemed. He has no right to sell her to foreigners because he has broken faith with her. If he selects her for his son, he must grant her the rights of a daughter. If he marries another woman, he must not deprive the first one of her food, clothing, and marital rights. If he does not provide her with these three things, she is to go free, without any payment of money.

Anyone who strikes a person with a fatal blow is to be put to death. However, if it is not done intentionally, but God lets it happen, they are to flee to a place He will designate. But if anyone schemes and kills someone deliberately, that person is to be taken from His altar and put to death.

Anyone who kidnaps someone is to be put to death, whether the victim has been sold or is still in the kidnapper's possession. Anyone who curses their father or mother is to be put to death.

If people quarrel and one person hits another with a stone or with their fist and the victim does not die but is confined to bed, the one who struck the blow will not be held liable if the other can get up and walk around outside with a staff. However, the guilty party must pay the injured person for any loss of time and see that the victim is completely healed.

If people are fighting and hit a pregnant woman and she gives birth prematurely but there is no serious injury, the offender must be fined whatever the woman's husband demands and the court allows. But if there is serious injury, you are to take life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burn for burn, wound for wound, bruise for bruise.

If a man hits his male or female slave with a rod and the slave dies as a direct result, he must be punished. But if the slave recovers after a day or two, he is not to be punished since the slave is his property.

If a man hits the eye of his male or female slave and destroys it, he must let the slave go free to compensate for the eye. And if he knocks out the tooth of a male or female slave, he must let the slave go free to compensate for the tooth.

If a bull gores a man or woman to death, the bull is to be stoned to death, and its meat must not be eaten. But the owner of the bull will not be held responsible. If, however, the bull has had the habit of goring and the owner has been warned but has not kept it penned up and it kills a man or woman, the bull is to be stoned, and its owner also is to be put to death. However, if payment is demanded, the owner may redeem his life by the payment of whatever is demanded. This law also applies if the bull gores a son or daughter. If the bull gores a male or female slave, the owner must pay thirty shekels of silver to the master of the slave, and the bull is to be stoned to death.

If anyone uncovers a pit or digs one and fails to cover it and an ox or a donkey falls into it, the one who opened the pit must pay the owner for the loss and take the dead animal in exchange. If someone's bull injures someone else's bull and it dies, the two parties are to sell the live one and divide both the money and the dead animal equally. However, if it was known that the bull had the habit of goring, yet the owner did not keep it penned up, the owner must pay animal for animal and take the dead animal in exchange.If someone steals an ox or a sheep and kills or sells it, they must repay five oxen for an ox and four sheep for a sheep. If a thief is caught breaking in and is struck down and dies, there is no guilt for the person who struck them. However, if it happens after sunrise, there is guilt, and the thief must make restitution. If they have nothing, they must be sold to pay for their theft. If the stolen animal is found alive in their possession, whether ox, donkey, or sheep, they must pay double.

If someone lets their animal graze in another person's field or vineyard, they must compensate with the best of their own field or vineyard. If a fire breaks out and spreads to thorns, consuming stacked grain, standing grain, or the field, the one who started the fire must make restitution.

If someone gives their neighbor money or goods for safekeeping and it is stolen from the neighbor's house, the thief, if caught, must pay double. If the thief is not found, the owner of the house must appear before God to determine if they have taken their neighbor's property. In all cases of dispute over property, whether ox, donkey, sheep, clothing, or any lost item, both parties must bring their case before God. The one whom God condemns must pay double to the other.

If someone gives their neighbor an animal for safekeeping and it dies, is injured, or is taken away without anyone seeing it, an oath before the Lord must be made between the two parties to confirm that the neighbor did not take the other’s property. The owner must accept this, and no restitution is required. But if the animal was stolen, restitution must be made to the owner. If it was torn to pieces by a wild animal, the remains must be brought as evidence, and no restitution is required.

If someone borrows an animal from their neighbor and it is injured or dies while the owner is not present, full restitution must be made. If the owner is with the animal, no restitution is required. If it was hired, the loss is covered by the hire fee.

If a man seduces a virgin who is not pledged to be married and sleeps with her, he must pay the bride price, and she will become his wife. If her father refuses to give her to him, he must still pay the bride price for virgins.

Do not allow a sorceress to live. Anyone who has sexual relations with an animal must be put to death. Anyone who sacrifices to any god other than the Lord must be destroyed.

Do not mistreat or oppress a foreigner, for you were foreigners in Egypt. Do not take advantage of a widow or an orphan. If you do and they cry out to me, I will certainly hear their cry. My anger will be aroused, and I will kill you with the sword; your wives will become widows and your children fatherless.

If you lend money to one of my people among you who is needy, do not treat it like a business deal; charge no interest. If you take your neighbor’s cloak as a pledge, return it by sunset, because that cloak is the only covering your neighbor has. What else can they sleep in? When they cry out to me, I will hear, for I am compassionate.

Do not blaspheme God or curse the ruler of your people. Do not hold back offerings from your granaries or your vats. You must give me the firstborn of your sons. Do the same with your cattle and your sheep. Let them stay with their mothers for seven days, but give them to me on the eighth day.

You are to be my holy people. So do not eat the meat of an animal torn by wild beasts; throw it to the dogs.

Do not spread false reports. Do not help a guilty person by being a malicious witness. If you come across your enemy’s ox or donkey wandering off, be sure to return it. If you see the donkey of someone who hates you fallen under its load, do not leave it there; be sure to help them with it.

Do not deny justice to your poor people in their lawsuits. Have nothing to do with a false charge and do not put an innocent or honest person to death, for I will not acquit the guilty. Do not accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds those who see and twists the words of the innocent.

Do not oppress a foreigner; you yourselves know how it feels to be foreigners because you were foreigners in Egypt.

For six years you are to sow your fields and harvest the crops, but during the seventh year let the land lie unplowed and unused. Then the poor among your people may get food from it, and the wild animals may eat what is left. Do the same with your vineyard and your olive grove.

Six days do your work, but on the seventh day do not work, so that your ox and your donkey may rest, and so that the slave born in your household and the foreigner living among you may be refreshed.

Be careful to do everything I have said to you. Do not invoke the names of other gods; do not let them be heard on your lips.

Three times a year you are to celebrate a festival to me. Celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread; for seven days eat bread made without yeast, as I commanded you. Do this at the appointed time in the month of Aviv, for in that month you came out of Egypt.

Celebrate the Festival of Harvest with the firstfruits of the crops you sow in your field. Celebrate the Festival of Ingathering at the end of the year when you gather in your crops from the field.

Three times a year all the men are to appear before the Sovereign Lord.

Do not offer the blood of a sacrifice to me along with anything containing yeast.

The fat of my festival offerings must not be kept until morning.

Bring the best of the firstfruits of your soil to the house of the Lord your God.

Do not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, saying, "This is the blood of the covenant that the LORD has made with you in accordance with all these words." Then Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy elders of Israel went up and saw the God of Israel. Under His feet was something like a pavement made of sapphire, clear as the sky itself. God did not raise His hand against these leaders; they saw God, and they ate and drank.

The LORD said to Moses, "Come up to Me on the mountain and stay here, and I will give you the tablets of stone with the law and commandments I have written for their instruction." Moses and his assistant Joshua set out, and Moses went up on the mountain of God. He told the elders, "Wait here for us until we come back. Aaron and Hur are with you; anyone involved in a dispute can go to them."

Moses went up the mountain, and the cloud covered it. The glory of the LORD settled on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it for six days. On the seventh day, the LORD called to Moses from within the cloud. To the Israelites, the glory of the LORD looked like a consuming fire on top of the mountain. Moses entered the cloud and went up the mountain, and he stayed on the mountain forty days and forty nights.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, "Tell the Israelites to bring Me an offering. You are to receive the offering for Me from everyone whose heart prompts them to give. These are the offerings you are to receive from them: gold, silver, and bronze; blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen; goat hair; ram skins dyed red and another type of durable leather; acacia wood; olive oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense; and onyx stones and other gems to be mounted on the ephod and breastpiece.

"Then have them make a sanctuary for Me, and I will dwell among them. Make this tabernacle and all its furnishings exactly like the pattern I will show you.

"Have them make an ark of acacia wood—two and a half cubits long, a cubit and a half wide, and a cubit and a half high. Overlay it with pure gold, both inside and out, and make a gold molding around it. Cast four gold rings for it and fasten them to its four feet, with two rings on one side and two rings on the other. Then make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold. Insert the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark to carry it. The poles are to remain in the rings of this ark; they are not to be removed. Then put in the ark the tablets of the covenant law, which I will give you.

"Make an atonement cover of pure gold—two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide. And make two cherubim out of hammered gold at the ends of the cover. Make one cherub on one end and the second cherub on the other; make the cherubim of one piece with the cover, at the two ends. The cherubim are to have their wings spread upward, overshadowing the cover with them. The cherubim are to face each other, looking toward the cover. Place the cover on top of the ark and put in the ark the tablets of the covenant law that I will give you. There, above the cover between the two cherubim that are over the ark of the covenant law, I will meet with you and give you all My commands for the Israelites.

"Make a table of acacia wood—two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high. Overlay it with pure gold and make a gold molding around it. Also make around it a rim a handbreadth wide and put a gold molding on the rim. Make four gold rings for the table and fasten them to the four corners, where the four legs are. The rings are to be close to the rim to hold the poles used in carrying the table. Make the poles of acacia wood, overlay them with gold, and carry the table with them. And make its plates and dishes of pure gold, as well as its pitchers and bowls for the pouring out of offerings. Put the bread of the Presence on this table to be before Me at all times.

"Make a lampstand of pure gold. Hammer out its base and shaft, and make its flower-like cups, buds, and blossoms of one piece with them. Six branches are to extend from the sides of the lampstand—three on one side and three on the other. Three cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms are to be on one branch, three on the next branch, and the same for all six branches extending from the lampstand. And on the lampstand, there are to be four cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms. One bud shall be under the first pair of branches extending from the lampstand, a second bud under the second pair, and a third bud under the third pair—six branches in all. The buds and branches shall all be of one piece with the lampstand, hammered out of pure gold. Then make its seven lamps and set them up on it so that they light the space in front of it. Its wick trimmers and trays are to be of pure gold. A talent of pure gold is to be used for the lampstand and all these accessories. See that you make them according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.

"Make the tabernacle with ten curtains of finely twisted linen and blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, with cherubim woven into them by a skilled worker. All the curtains are to be the same size—twenty-eight cubits long and four cubits wide. Join five of the curtains together, and do the same with the other five. Make loops of blue material along the edge of the end curtain in one set, and do the same with the end curtain in the other set. Make fifty loops on one curtain and fifty loops on the end curtain of the other set, with the loops opposite each other. Then make fifty gold clasps and use them to fasten the curtains together so that the tabernacle is a unit.

"Make curtains of goat hair for the tent over the tabernacle—eleven altogether. All eleven curtains are to be the same size—thirty cubits long and four cubits wide. Join five of the curtains together into one set and the other six into another set. Fold the sixth curtain double at the front of the tent. Make fifty loops along the edge of the end curtain in one set and also along the edge of the end curtain in the other set. Then make fifty bronze clasps and put them in the loops to fasten the tent together as a unit. As for the additional length of the tent curtains, the half curtain that is left over is to hang down at the rear of the tabernacle. The tent curtains will be a cubit longer on both sides; what is left will hang over the sides of the tabernacle so as to cover it. Make for the tent a covering of ram skins dyed red, and over that a covering of the other durable leather.

"Make upright frames of acacia wood for the tabernacle. Each frame is to be ten cubits long and a cubit and a half wide, with two projections set parallel to each other. Make all the frames of the tabernacle in this way. Make twenty frames for the south side of the tabernacle and make forty silver bases to go under them—two bases for each frame, one under each projection. For the other side, the north side of the tabernacle, make twenty frames and forty silver bases—two under each frame. Make six frames for the far end, that is, the west end of the tabernacle, and make two frames for the corners at the far end. At these two corners, they must be double from the bottom all the way to the top and fitted into a single ring; both shall be like that. So there will be eight frames and sixteen silver bases—two under each frame."Make bars of acacia wood: five for the boards on one side of the tabernacle, five for the boards on the other side, and five for the boards on the west side. The middle bar, halfway up the boards, will run from end to end. Overlay the boards with gold and make gold rings to hold the bars. Overlay the bars with gold as well. Set up the tabernacle according to the pattern shown to you on the mountain.

Make a veil of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely twisted linen, with cherubim woven into it by a skilled worker. Hang it on four posts of acacia wood overlaid with gold, with gold hooks on four silver bases. Hang the veil under the clasps and place the Ark of the Covenant behind the veil. The veil will separate the Holy Place from the Most Holy Place. Place the atonement cover on the Ark of the Covenant in the Most Holy Place. Place the table outside the veil on the north side of the tabernacle and the lampstand opposite it on the south side.

Make a curtain for the entrance to the tent of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely twisted linen—the work of an embroiderer. Make five posts of acacia wood for the curtain and overlay them with gold. Their hooks shall be gold, and you shall cast five bronze bases for them.

Make an altar of acacia wood, five cubits long and five cubits wide—the altar is to be square—and three cubits high. Make a horn at each of the four corners, so that the horns and the altar are of one piece, and overlay the altar with bronze. Make all its utensils of bronze—its pots to remove the ashes, and its shovels, sprinkling bowls, meat forks, and firepans. Make a bronze grating, a network, and a bronze ring at each of the four corners of the network. Put it under the ledge of the altar so that it is halfway up the altar. Make poles of acacia wood for the altar and overlay them with bronze. The poles are to be inserted into the rings so they will be on two sides of the altar when it is carried. Make the altar hollow, out of boards. It is to be made just as you were shown on the mountain.

Make a courtyard for the tabernacle. The south side shall be a hundred cubits long and is to have curtains of finely twisted linen, with twenty posts and twenty bronze bases, with silver hooks and bands on the posts. The north side shall also be a hundred cubits long, with twenty posts and twenty bronze bases, with silver hooks and bands on the posts. The west end of the courtyard shall be fifty cubits wide and have curtains, with ten posts and ten bases. On the east end, the courtyard shall also be fifty cubits wide. The curtains on one side of the entrance shall be fifteen cubits long, with three posts and three bases, and the curtains on the other side shall also be fifteen cubits long, with three posts and three bases.

For the entrance to the courtyard, provide a curtain twenty cubits long, of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely twisted linen—the work of an embroiderer—with four posts and four bases. All the posts around the courtyard are to have silver bands and hooks, and bronze bases. The courtyard shall be a hundred cubits long and fifty cubits wide, with curtains of finely twisted linen five cubits high, and with bronze bases. All the other articles used in the service of the tabernacle, including all the tent pegs for it and those for the courtyard, are to be of bronze.

Command the Israelites to bring you clear oil of pressed olives for the light so that the lamps may be kept burning continually. In the tent of meeting, outside the curtain that shields the Ark of the Covenant, Aaron and his sons are to keep the lamps burning before the Lord from evening till morning. This is to be a lasting ordinance among the Israelites for the generations to come.

Bring Aaron and his sons to you from among the Israelites to serve me as priests—Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. Make sacred garments for your brother Aaron to give him dignity and honor. Tell all the skilled workers to whom I have given wisdom in such matters that they are to make garments for Aaron, for his consecration, so he may serve me as priest. These are the garments they are to make: a breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a woven tunic, a turban, and a sash. They are to make these sacred garments for your brother Aaron and his sons so they may serve me as priests. Have them use gold, and blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine linen.

Make the ephod of gold, and of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and of finely twisted linen—the work of skilled hands. It is to have two shoulder pieces attached to two of its corners, so it can be fastened. Its skillfully woven waistband is to be like it—of one piece with the ephod and made with gold, and with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and with finely twisted linen. Take two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel in the order of their birth—six names on one stone and the remaining six on the other. Engrave the names of the sons of Israel on the two stones the way a gem cutter engraves a seal. Then mount the stones in gold filigree settings and fasten them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod as memorial stones for the sons of Israel. Aaron is to bear the names on his shoulders as a memorial before the Lord. Make gold filigree settings and two braided chains of pure gold, like a rope, and attach the chains to the settings.

Fashion a breastpiece for making decisions—the work of skilled hands. Make it like the ephod: of gold, and of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and of finely twisted linen. It is to be square—a span long and a span wide—and folded double. Then mount four rows of precious stones on it. The first row shall be carnelian, chrysolite, and beryl; the second row shall be turquoise, lapis lazuli, and emerald; the third row shall be jacinth, agate, and amethyst; the fourth row shall be topaz, onyx, and jasper. Mount them in gold filigree settings. There are to be twelve stones, one for each of the names of the sons of Israel, each engraved like a seal with the name of one of the twelve tribes. For the breastpiece, make braided chains of pure gold, like a rope. Make two gold rings for it and fasten them to two corners of the breastpiece. Fasten the two gold chains to the rings at the corners of the breastpiece, and the other ends of the chains to the two settings, attaching them to the shoulder pieces of the ephod at the front. Make two gold rings and attach them to the other two corners of the breastpiece on the inside edge next to the ephod. Make two more gold rings and attach them to the bottom of the shoulder pieces on the front of the ephod, close to the seam just above the waistband of the ephod. The rings of the breastpiece are to be tied to the rings of the ephod with blue cord, connecting it to the waistband so that the breastpiece will not swing out from the ephod. Whenever Aaron enters the Holy Place, he will bear the names of the sons of Israel over his heart on the breastpiece of decision as a continuing memorial before the Lord. Also put the Urim and the Thummim in the breastpiece, so they may be over Aaron’s heart whenever he enters the presence of the Lord. Thus Aaron will always bear the means of making decisions for the Israelites over his heart before the Lord."Aaron will carry the names of the sons of Israel on his heart before the Lord continually.

Make the robe for the ephod entirely of blue cloth. It should have an opening for the head in the center, with a woven edge around the opening to prevent tearing. Decorate the hem with pomegranates made of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, alternating with gold bells. Aaron must wear this robe when he ministers, so the sound of the bells will be heard when he enters and exits the holy place before the Lord, ensuring he does not die.

Create a plate of pure gold and engrave on it, like a seal, "HOLY TO THE LORD." Attach it to a blue cord and place it on the front of the turban. It will be on Aaron's forehead, and he will bear any guilt involved in the sacred offerings the Israelites consecrate. It must always be on his forehead so they will be accepted before the Lord.

Weave the tunic from fine linen in a checkered pattern, make the turban of fine linen, and craft a sash with colorful embroidery. For Aaron's sons, make tunics, sashes, and headbands for dignity and honor. Dress Aaron and his sons in these garments, anoint and ordain them, and consecrate them so they may serve as priests. Make linen undergarments to cover their nakedness, reaching from the waist to the thighs. Aaron and his sons must wear these whenever they enter the tent of meeting or approach the altar to minister in the holy place, so they do not incur guilt and die. This is a lasting ordinance for Aaron and his descendants.

To consecrate them for their priestly duties, take a young bull and two unblemished rams, along with unleavened bread, unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, made from fine wheat flour. Place these in a basket and present them along with the bull and the two rams. Bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the tent of meeting and wash them with water. Dress Aaron in the tunic, the robe of the ephod, the ephod itself, and the breastpiece, and fasten the ephod with its woven waistband. Place the turban on his head and attach the holy crown to the turban. Anoint him by pouring the anointing oil on his head. Bring his sons forward, dress them in tunics, and tie sashes around them. Put headbands on them, and they will have the priesthood by a lasting ordinance. Consecrate Aaron and his sons.

Bring the bull to the front of the tent of meeting, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on its head. Slaughter the bull before the Lord at the entrance to the tent of meeting. Take some of its blood and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger, and pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar. Take all the fat around the internal organs, the long lobe of the liver, and both kidneys with the fat on them, and burn them on the altar. But burn the bull's flesh, hide, and intestines outside the camp as a sin offering.

Take one of the rams, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on its head. Slaughter the ram and take its blood and splash it against the sides of the altar. Cut the ram into pieces, wash the internal organs and legs, and place them with the head and the other pieces. Burn the entire ram on the altar as a burnt offering to the Lord, a pleasing aroma, a food offering presented to the Lord.

Take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on its head. Slaughter the ram, take some of its blood, and put it on the right earlobes of Aaron and his sons, on the thumbs of their right hands, and on the big toes of their right feet. Splash the rest of the blood against the sides of the altar. Take some of the blood on the altar and some of the anointing oil and sprinkle it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and their garments. This will consecrate Aaron and his garments, and his sons and their garments.

Take the fat from the ram, the fat tail, the fat covering the internal organs, the long lobe of the liver, both kidneys with the fat on them, and the right thigh. From the basket of bread made without yeast, which is before the Lord, take one round loaf, one thick loaf with olive oil mixed in, and one thin loaf. Put all these in the hands of Aaron and his sons and wave them before the Lord as a wave offering. Then take them from their hands and burn them on the altar along with the burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to the Lord, a food offering presented to the Lord.

Take the breast of the ram for Aaron's ordination and wave it before the Lord as a wave offering, and it will be your share. Consecrate those parts of the ordination ram that belong to Aaron and his sons: the breast that was waved and the thigh that was presented. This is always to be the perpetual share from the Israelites for Aaron and his sons. It is the contribution the Israelites are to make to the Lord from their fellowship offerings.

Aaron's sacred garments will belong to his descendants so they can be anointed and ordained in them. The son who succeeds him as priest and comes to the tent of meeting to minister in the Holy Place is to wear them seven days.

Take the ram for the ordination and cook the meat in a sacred place. Aaron and his sons are to eat the meat of the ram and the bread in the basket at the entrance to the tent of meeting. They are to eat these offerings by which atonement was made for their ordination and consecration. No one else may eat them because they are sacred. If any of the meat of the ordination ram or any bread is left over till morning, burn it up. It must not be eaten because it is sacred.

Do for Aaron and his sons everything I have commanded you, taking seven days to ordain them. Sacrifice a bull each day as a sin offering to make atonement. Purify the altar by making atonement for it and anoint it to consecrate it. For seven days make atonement for the altar and consecrate it. Then the altar will be most holy, and whatever touches it will be holy.

This is what you are to offer on the altar regularly each day: two lambs a year old. Offer one in the morning and the other at twilight. With the first lamb, offer a tenth of an ephah of the finest flour mixed with a quarter of a hin of oil from pressed olives, and a quarter of a hin of wine as a drink offering. Sacrifice the other lamb at twilight with the same grain offering and its drink offering as in the morning—a pleasing aroma, a food offering presented to the Lord.

For the generations to come, this burnt offering is to be made regularly at the entrance to the tent of meeting before the Lord. There I will meet you and speak to you; there also I will meet with the Israelites, and the place will be consecrated by my glory. So I will consecrate the tent of meeting and the altar and will consecrate Aaron and his sons to serve me as priests. Then I will dwell among the Israelites and be their God. They will know that I am the Lord their God, who brought them out of Egypt so that I might dwell among them. I am the Lord their God.

Make an altar of acacia wood for burning incense. It is to be square, a cubit long and a cubit wide, and two cubits high—its horns of one piece with it. Overlay the top and all the sides and the horns with pure gold."...and the horns. Make a gold crown around it. 

Make two gold rings for it under the crown, on its two sides, to hold the poles used to carry it. Make the poles from acacia wood and cover them with gold. Place the altar in front of the veil that is near the Ark of the Testimony, in front of the cover that is over the Testimony, where I will meet with you.

Aaron must burn fragrant incense on it every morning when he tends the lamps. He must also burn incense again at twilight when he lights the lamps. This incense offering must be perpetual before the Lord for generations to come. Do not offer any unauthorized incense, burnt offering, grain offering, or drink offering on this altar. Once a year, Aaron must make atonement on its horns with the blood of the sin offering of atonement. This annual atonement must be made for generations to come. It is most holy to the Lord.

The Lord spoke to Moses, saying: When you take a census of the Israelites, each one must pay a ransom for his life to the Lord to avoid any plague during the counting. Each person counted must give half a shekel, according to the sanctuary shekel, which weighs twenty gerahs. This half shekel is an offering to the Lord. Everyone twenty years old or older must give this offering. The rich should not give more, and the poor should not give less than half a shekel. Use this atonement money for the service of the Tent of Meeting. It will be a memorial for the Israelites before the Lord, making atonement for their lives.

The Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Make a bronze basin with a bronze stand for washing. Place it between the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and put water in it. Aaron and his sons must wash their hands and feet with water from it whenever they enter the Tent of Meeting or approach the altar to minister by presenting a food offering to the Lord. They must wash so that they will not die. This is a lasting ordinance for Aaron and his descendants for generations to come.

The Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Take the finest spices: 500 shekels of liquid myrrh, 250 shekels of fragrant cinnamon, 250 shekels of fragrant cane, 500 shekels of cassia, all according to the sanctuary shekel, and a hin of olive oil. Make these into a sacred anointing oil, a fragrant blend, the work of a perfumer. Use it to anoint the Tent of Meeting, the Ark of the Testimony, the table and all its articles, the lampstand and its accessories, the altar of incense, the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the basin with its stand. You must consecrate them so they will be most holy, and whatever touches them will be holy. Anoint Aaron and his sons and consecrate them so they may serve me as priests. Tell the Israelites, 'This will be my sacred anointing oil for generations to come. Do not pour it on anyone else's body and do not make any other oil using the same formula. It is sacred, and you are to consider it sacred. Anyone who makes perfume like it or puts it on someone who is not a priest must be cut off from their people.'

The Lord said to Moses: Take fragrant spices—gum resin, onycha, galbanum—and pure frankincense, all in equal amounts, and make a fragrant blend of incense, the work of a perfumer. It is to be salted and pure and sacred. Grind some of it to powder and place it in front of the Testimony in the Tent of Meeting, where I will meet with you. It shall be most holy to you. Do not make any incense with this formula for yourselves; consider it holy to the Lord. Whoever makes incense like it to enjoy its fragrance must be cut off from their people.

The Lord spoke to Moses, saying: See, I have chosen Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, and I have filled him with the Spirit of God, with wisdom, understanding, knowledge, and all kinds of skills—to make artistic designs for work in gold, silver, and bronze, to cut and set stones, to work in wood, and to engage in all kinds of crafts. Moreover, I have appointed Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, to help him. Also, I have given ability to all the skilled workers to make everything I have commanded you: the Tent of Meeting, the Ark of the Testimony with the atonement cover on it, and all the other furnishings of the tent—the table and its articles, the pure gold lampstand and all its accessories, the altar of incense, the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, the basin with its stand—and also the woven garments, both the sacred garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons when they serve as priests, and the anointing oil and fragrant incense for the Holy Place. They are to make them just as I commanded you.

The Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Tell the Israelites, 'You must observe my Sabbaths. This will be a sign between me and you for generations to come, so you may know that I am the Lord, who makes you holy. Observe the Sabbath, because it is holy to you. Anyone who desecrates it is to be put to death; those who do any work on that day must be cut off from their people. For six days work is to be done, but the seventh day is a day of sabbath rest, holy to the Lord. Whoever does any work on the Sabbath day is to be put to death. The Israelites are to observe the Sabbath, celebrating it for generations to come as a lasting covenant. It will be a sign between me and the Israelites forever, for in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed.'

When the Lord finished speaking to Moses on Mount Sinai, he gave him the two tablets of the covenant law, the tablets of stone inscribed by the finger of God."The people said, "Make us a god to lead us, because we don't know what happened to Moses, who brought us out of Egypt." Aaron replied, "Anyone with gold, take it off." They gave him the gold, he threw it into the fire, and out came a calf.

The Lord told Moses, "Go down, because your people, whom you brought out of Egypt, have become corrupt. They quickly turned away from what I commanded and made an idol in the shape of a calf. They are worshiping it and saying, 'This is your god, Israel, who brought you out of Egypt.' I have seen these people, and they are stubborn. Leave me alone so my anger can burn against them and I can destroy them. Then I will make you into a great nation."

Moses pleaded with the Lord, "Why should your anger burn against your people, whom you brought out of Egypt with great power? Why should the Egyptians say, 'He brought them out to kill them in the mountains and wipe them off the face of the earth'? Turn from your fierce anger; relent and do not bring disaster on your people. Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to whom you swore by your own self: 'I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and will give your descendants all this land I promised them, and it will be their inheritance forever.'" Then the Lord relented and did not bring on his people the disaster he had threatened.

When Moses saw that the people were running wild and that Aaron had let them get out of control, he stood at the entrance to the camp and said, "Whoever is for the Lord, come to me." All the Levites rallied to him. He said to them, "This is what the Lord, the God of Israel, says: 'Each man strap a sword to his side. Go back and forth through the camp from one end to the other, killing his brother and friend and neighbor.'" The Levites did as Moses commanded, and about three thousand people died that day. Moses said, "You have been set apart to the Lord today, for you were against your own sons and brothers, and he has blessed you this day."

The next day Moses said to the people, "You have committed a great sin. But now I will go up to the Lord; perhaps I can make atonement for your sin." So Moses went back to the Lord and said, "Oh, what a great sin these people have committed! They have made themselves gods of gold. But now, please forgive their sin—but if not, then blot me out of the book you have written." The Lord replied to Moses, "Whoever has sinned against me I will blot out of my book. Now go, lead the people to the place I spoke of, and my angel will go before you. However, when the time comes for me to punish, I will punish them for their sin." And the Lord struck the people with a plague because of what they did with the calf Aaron had made.

The Lord said to Moses, "Leave this place, you and the people you brought up out of Egypt, and go to the land I promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, 'I will give it to your descendants.' I will send an angel before you and drive out the Canaanites, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites. Go up to the land flowing with milk and honey. But I will not go with you, because you are a stiff-necked people and I might destroy you on the way."

When the people heard these distressing words, they began to mourn and no one put on any ornaments. For the Lord had said to Moses, "Tell the Israelites, 'You are a stiff-necked people. If I were to go with you even for a moment, I might destroy you. Now take off your ornaments and I will decide what to do with you.'" So the Israelites stripped off their ornaments at Mount Horeb.

Moses used to take a tent and pitch it outside the camp some distance away, calling it the "tent of meeting." Anyone inquiring of the Lord would go to the tent of meeting outside the camp. Whenever Moses went out to the tent, all the people rose and stood at the entrances to their tents, watching Moses until he entered the tent. As Moses went into the tent, the pillar of cloud would come down and stay at the entrance, while the Lord spoke with Moses. Whenever the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance to the tent, they all stood and worshiped, each at the entrance to their tent. The Lord would speak to Moses face to face, as one speaks to a friend. Then Moses would return to the camp, but his young aide Joshua son of Nun did not leave the tent.

Moses said to the Lord, "You have been telling me, 'Lead these people,' but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. You have said, 'I know you by name and you have found favor with me.' If you are pleased with me, teach me your ways so I may know you and continue to find favor with you. Remember that this nation is your people." The Lord replied, "My Presence will go with you, and I will give you rest." Then Moses said to him, "If your Presence does not go with us, do not send us up from here. How will anyone know that you are pleased with me and with your people unless you go with us? What else will distinguish me and your people from all the other people on the face of the earth?" And the Lord said to Moses, "I will do the very thing you have asked, because I am pleased with you and I know you by name." Then Moses said, "Now show me your glory." And the Lord said, "I will cause all my goodness to pass in front of you, and I will proclaim my name, the Lord, in your presence. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. But," he said, "you cannot see my face, for no one may see me and live." Then the Lord said, "There is a place near me where you may stand on a rock. When my glory passes by, I will put you in a cleft in the rock and cover you with my hand until I have passed by. Then I will remove my hand and you will see my back; but my face must not be seen."

The Lord said to Moses, "Chisel out two stone tablets like the first ones, and I will write on them the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke. Be ready in the morning, and then come up on Mount Sinai. Present yourself to me there on top of the mountain. No one is to come with you or be seen anywhere on the mountain; not even the flocks and herds may graze in front of the mountain." So Moses chiseled out two stone tablets like the first ones and went up Mount Sinai early in the morning, as the Lord had commanded him; and he carried the two stone tablets in his hands. Then the Lord came down in the cloud and stood there with him and proclaimed his name, the Lord. And he passed in front of Moses, proclaiming, "The Lord, the Lord, the compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger, abounding in love and faithfulness, maintaining love to thousands, and forgiving wickedness, rebellion, and sin. Yet he does not leave the guilty unpunished; he punishes the children and their children for the sin of the parents to the third and fourth generation." Moses bowed to the ground at once and worshiped. "Lord," he said, "if I have found favor in your eyes, then let the Lord go with us. Although this is a stiff-necked people, forgive our wickedness and our sin, and take us as your inheritance."

Then the Lord said: "I am making a covenant with you. Before all your people I will do wonders never before done in any nation in all the world. The people you live among will see how awesome is the work that I, the Lord, will do for you. Obey what I command you today. I will drive out before you the Amorites, Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites. Be careful not to make a treaty with those who live in the land where you are going, or they will be a snare among you. Break down their altars, smash their sacred stones and cut down their Asherah poles. Do not worship any other god, for the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God. Be careful not to make a treaty with those who live in the land; for when they prostitute themselves to their gods and sacrifice to them, they will invite you and you will eat their sacrifices. And when you choose some of their daughters as wives for your sons and those daughters prostitute themselves to their gods, they will lead your sons to do the same. Do not make any idols. Celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread.Celebrate the Festival of Unleavened Bread as I commanded you. For seven days, eat unleavened bread at the appointed time in the month of Abib, because that is when you came out of Egypt. 

All firstborn males of your livestock belong to me, including oxen and sheep. Redeem the firstborn donkey with a lamb; if you do not redeem it, break its neck. Redeem all your firstborn sons. No one is to appear before me empty-handed.

Work for six days, but rest on the seventh day, even during plowing and harvest seasons. Observe the Festival of Weeks with the first fruits of the wheat harvest, and the Festival of Ingathering at the end of the year. Three times a year, all your men must appear before the Lord, the God of Israel. I will drive out nations before you and enlarge your territory, and no one will covet your land when you go up to appear before the Lord your God three times a year.

Do not offer the blood of a sacrifice to me along with anything containing yeast, and do not let any of the sacrifice from the Passover Festival remain until morning. Bring the best of the first fruits of your soil to the house of the Lord your God. Do not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.

The Lord said to Moses, "Write down these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel." Moses was there with the Lord for forty days and forty nights without eating bread or drinking water. He wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant—the Ten Commandments.

When Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of the covenant law in his hands, he was unaware that his face was radiant because he had spoken with the Lord. When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, his face was radiant, and they were afraid to come near him. But Moses called to them, so Aaron and all the leaders of the community came back to him, and he spoke to them. Afterward, all the Israelites came near him, and he gave them all the commands the Lord had given him on Mount Sinai.

When Moses finished speaking to them, he put a veil over his face. But whenever he entered the Lord’s presence to speak with him, he removed the veil until he came out. When he came out and told the Israelites what he had been commanded, they saw that his face was radiant. Then Moses would put the veil back over his face until he went in to speak with the Lord.

Moses assembled the whole Israelite community and said to them, "These are the things the Lord has commanded you to do: For six days, work is to be done, but the seventh day shall be your holy day, a day of sabbath rest to the Lord. Whoever does any work on it is to be put to death. Do not light a fire in any of your dwellings on the Sabbath day."

Moses said to the whole Israelite community, "This is what the Lord has commanded: From what you have, take an offering for the Lord. Everyone who is willing is to bring to the Lord an offering of gold, silver, and bronze; blue, purple and scarlet yarn and fine linen; goat hair; ram skins dyed red and another type of durable leather; acacia wood; olive oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense; and onyx stones and other gems to be mounted on the ephod and breastpiece.

All who are skilled among you are to come and make everything the Lord has commanded: the tabernacle with its tent and its covering, clasps, frames, crossbars, posts and bases; the ark with its poles and the atonement cover and the curtain that shields it; the table with its poles and all its articles and the bread of the Presence; the lampstand that is for light with its accessories, lamps and oil for the light; the altar of incense with its poles, the anointing oil and the fragrant incense; the curtain for the doorway at the entrance to the tabernacle; the altar of burnt offering with its bronze grating, its poles and all its utensils; the bronze basin with its stand; the curtains of the courtyard with its posts and bases, and the curtain for the entrance to the courtyard; the tent pegs for the tabernacle and for the courtyard, and their ropes; the woven garments worn for ministering in the sanctuary—both the sacred garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons when they serve as priests."

Then the whole Israelite community withdrew from Moses’ presence, and everyone who was willing and whose heart moved them came and brought an offering to the Lord for the work on the tent of meeting, for all its service, and for the sacred garments. All who were willing, men and women alike, came and brought gold jewelry of all kinds: brooches, earrings, rings and ornaments. They all presented their gold as a wave offering to the Lord. Everyone who had blue, purple or scarlet yarn or fine linen, or goat hair, ram skins dyed red or other durable leather brought them. Those presenting an offering of silver or bronze brought it as an offering to the Lord, and everyone who had acacia wood for any part of the work brought it. Every skilled woman spun with her hands and brought what she had spun—blue, purple or scarlet yarn or fine linen. And all the women who were willing and had the skill spun the goat hair. The leaders brought onyx stones and other gems to be mounted on the ephod and breastpiece. They also brought spices and olive oil for the light and for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense. All the Israelite men and women who were willing brought to the Lord freewill offerings for all the work the Lord through Moses had commanded them to do.

Then Moses said to the Israelites, "See, the Lord has chosen Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, and he has filled him with the Spirit of God, with wisdom, with understanding, with knowledge and with all kinds of skills—to make artistic designs for work in gold, silver and bronze, to cut and set stones, to work in wood and to engage in all kinds of artistic crafts. And he has given both him and Oholiab son of Ahisamak, of the tribe of Dan, the ability to teach others. He has filled them with skill to do all kinds of work as engravers, designers, embroiderers in blue, purple and scarlet yarn and fine linen, and weavers—all of them skilled workers and designers.

So Bezalel, Oholiab and every skilled person to whom the Lord has given skill and ability to know how to carry out all the work of constructing the sanctuary are to do the work just as the Lord has commanded." Then Moses summoned Bezalel and Oholiab and every skilled person to whom the Lord had given ability and who was willing to come and do the work. They received from Moses all the offerings the Israelites had brought to carry out the work of constructing the sanctuary. And the people continued to bring freewill offerings morning after morning. So all the skilled workers who were doing all the work on the sanctuary left what they were doing and said to Moses, "The people are bringing more than enough for doing the work the Lord commanded to be done."

Then Moses gave an order and they sent this word throughout the camp: "No man or woman is to make anything else as an offering for the sanctuary." And so the people were restrained from bringing more, because what they already had was more than enough to do all the work.He made the Ark's cover from pure gold, measuring two and a half cubits long and one and a half cubits wide. He crafted two gold cherubim from hammered gold, placing them at each end of the cover. The cherubim faced each other with their wings spread upward, covering the Ark's cover.

He constructed the tabernacle's boards from acacia wood, each ten cubits long and one and a half cubits wide. Each board had two tenons for fitting together. He made twenty boards for the south side and twenty for the north side, with forty silver bases for the boards, two bases under each board. For the west side, he made six boards and two additional boards for the tabernacle's corners, making a total of eight boards with sixteen silver bases.

He made five bars of acacia wood for the boards on each side of the tabernacle, with the middle bar running from end to end. He overlaid the boards and bars with gold and made gold rings to hold the bars.

He made the table from acacia wood, two cubits long, one cubit wide, and one and a half cubits high, and overlaid it with pure gold. He made a gold molding around it and a handbreadth-wide border with a gold molding. He cast four gold rings for the table and attached them to the four corners near the border to hold the poles for carrying the table. He made the poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. He also made the table's utensils—dishes, pans, bowls, and jars—from pure gold.

He made the veil from blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and finely twisted linen, with cherubim skillfully worked into it. He made four posts of acacia wood, overlaid them with gold, and cast four silver bases for them. He made a screen for the tent's entrance from blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and finely twisted linen, the work of a weaver, with five posts and hooks overlaid with gold and five bronze bases.

He made the lampstand from pure gold, with its base, shaft, cups, buds, and flowers all of one piece. Six branches extended from the sides, three on each side. Each branch had three cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms. The lampstand itself had four cups shaped like almond flowers with buds and blossoms. He made seven lamps, wick trimmers, and trays from pure gold, using a talent of pure gold for the lampstand and its accessories.

He made the altar of incense from acacia wood, one cubit square and two cubits high, with horns of one piece with it. He overlaid the top, sides, and horns with pure gold and made a gold molding around it. He made two gold rings below the molding on opposite sides to hold the poles for carrying the altar. He made the poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. He also made the sacred anointing oil and the pure, fragrant incense, the work of a perfumer.

He made the altar of burnt offering from acacia wood, five cubits square and three cubits high, with horns of one piece with it. He overlaid the altar with bronze and made all its utensils—pots, shovels, basins, meat forks, and firepans—from bronze. He made a bronze grating for the altar, a network under its ledge, halfway up the altar. He cast four bronze rings for the grating to hold the poles. He made the poles from acacia wood and overlaid them with bronze. He inserted the poles into the rings on the sides of the altar to carry it. He made the altar hollow, out of boards.

He made the bronze basin and its stand from the mirrors of the women who served at the entrance to the tent of meeting.

He made the courtyard with hangings of finely twisted linen, a hundred cubits long on the south side with twenty bronze posts and bases, and silver hooks and bands. The north side was the same. The west side had hangings fifty cubits long with ten posts and bases, and the east side was also fifty cubits long. The hangings on one side of the gate were fifteen cubits long with three posts and bases, and the same on the other side. All the courtyard hangings were of finely twisted linen, with bronze bases, silver hooks and bands, and overlaid capitals. The screen for the courtyard gate was made of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and finely twisted linen, twenty cubits long and five cubits high, with four posts and bases. All the tent pegs for the tabernacle and the surrounding courtyard were bronze.

These are the records of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the covenant law, as recorded at Moses' command by the Levites under Ithamar, son of Aaron the priest. Bezalel, son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made everything the Lord commanded Moses.Bezalel, son of Uri, from the tribe of Judah, made everything the LORD commanded Moses. He was assisted by Oholiab, son of Ahisamach, from the tribe of Dan, who was a skilled craftsman and weaver in blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine linen.

All the gold used for the sanctuary work totaled 29 talents and 730 shekels, measured by the sanctuary shekel. The silver collected from the community was 100 talents and 1,775 shekels, also measured by the sanctuary shekel. This silver came from a census where each man aged 20 and above paid half a shekel, totaling 603,550 men. The 100 talents of silver were used to cast the bases for the sanctuary and the curtain, with each base weighing one talent. The remaining 1,775 shekels were used to make hooks for the posts, overlay their tops, and make bands for them.

The bronze from the offerings weighed 70 talents and 2,400 shekels. This bronze was used to make the bases for the entrance to the tent of meeting, the bronze altar and its grating, all the altar utensils, the bases for the surrounding courtyard, the bases for the entrance gate, and all the tent pegs for the tabernacle and the surrounding courtyard.

From blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, they made woven garments for ministering in the holy place, including the sacred garments for Aaron, as the LORD commanded Moses. The ephod was made of gold, blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely twisted linen. They hammered the gold into thin sheets and cut it into strands to be worked into the blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen by skilled workers. The ephod had shoulder pieces attached at its two corners, and a waistband made of the same materials.

The robe of the ephod was made entirely of blue cloth, with an opening in the center like a coat of mail, reinforced to prevent tearing. The hem of the robe was decorated with pomegranates made of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely twisted linen, alternating with gold bells.

They also made the onyx stones, set in gold filigree, engraved with the names of the sons of Israel, and mounted them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod as memorial stones.

The breastpiece was made by skilled workers, using the same materials as the ephod. It was square and doubled over, measuring a span in length and width. They mounted four rows of precious stones on it: carnelian, topaz, and emerald in the first row; turquoise, sapphire, and emerald in the second row; jacinth, agate, and amethyst in the third row; and beryl, onyx, and jasper in the fourth row. Each stone was set in gold filigree and engraved with the name of one of the twelve tribes of Israel. They made braided chains of pure gold for the breastpiece and attached them to gold rings at the corners of the breastpiece, which were then fastened to the ephod.

They made the tunics of fine linen for Aaron and his sons, the turban of fine linen, the linen caps, and the undergarments of finely twisted linen. The sash was made of finely twisted linen and blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, the work of an embroiderer.

They made the plate of the sacred diadem out of pure gold and engraved on it, "HOLY TO THE LORD." They fastened a blue cord to it to attach it to the turban, as the LORD commanded Moses.

All the work for the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, was completed as the LORD commanded Moses. The Israelites did all the work just as the LORD commanded. Moses inspected the work and saw that they had done it just as the LORD commanded. So Moses blessed them.

The LORD then instructed Moses to set up the tabernacle on the first day of the first month. He was to place the ark of the testimony inside and shield it with the curtain. He was to bring in the table and set out its items, bring in the lampstand and set up its lamps, place the gold altar of incense in front of the ark of the testimony, and put up the curtain at the entrance to the tabernacle. He was to place the altar of burnt offering in front of the entrance to the tabernacle, set the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar, and fill it with water. He was to set up the courtyard around it and hang the curtain at the entrance to the courtyard.

Moses was to take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and everything in it, consecrating it and all its furnishings. He was to anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, consecrating the altar so it would be most holy. He was to anoint the basin and its stand, consecrating them.

Moses was to bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance to the tent of meeting, wash them with water, dress Aaron in the sacred garments, anoint and consecrate him so he could serve as priest. He was to bring Aaron's sons, dress them in tunics, and anoint them as he anointed their father, so they could serve as priests. Their anointing would be a lasting priesthood for generations to come.

Moses did everything just as the LORD commanded. On the first day of the first month of the second year, the tabernacle was set up. Moses set up the tabernacle, laid its bases, set up its frames, inserted its crossbars, and set up its posts. He spread the tent over the tabernacle and put the covering over the tent, as the LORD commanded him. He took the tablets of the covenant law and placed them in the ark, attached the poles to the ark, and put the atonement cover over it.Moses placed the poles on the ark and set the cover on top. He brought the ark into the tabernacle, set up the veil to screen it, and followed the LORD's instructions. He placed the table on the north side of the tabernacle outside the veil and arranged the bread on it before the LORD. He positioned the lampstand opposite the table on the south side and lit the lamps as commanded. The golden altar was placed in front of the veil, and incense was burned on it. Moses set up the screen at the entrance of the tabernacle and placed the altar of burnt offering at the entrance, offering burnt and meal offerings as instructed. He positioned the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar, filling it with water for washing. Moses, Aaron, and his sons washed their hands and feet there whenever they entered the tent of meeting or approached the altar, as commanded.

Moses set up the courtyard around the tabernacle and altar, and hung the screen at the gate. With the work completed, a cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle. Moses couldn't enter because of the cloud and the LORD's glory. Whenever the cloud lifted, the Israelites would continue their journey. If it didn't lift, they stayed put. The cloud of the LORD was over the tabernacle by day, and fire was in it by night, visible to all the Israelites throughout their travels.

In Leviticus, the LORD called to Moses from the tent of meeting, instructing him to tell the Israelites about offerings. When someone brings an offering, it should be from cattle, sheep, or goats, without blemish. They should bring it to the tent of meeting entrance to be accepted by the LORD. The person must lay their hand on the offering's head for atonement, then kill it. Aaron's sons, the priests, will present the blood and dash it around the altar. The offering will be cut into pieces, and the priests will arrange them on the altar's fire. The inner parts and legs will be washed with water, and the whole offering will be burned as a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

If the offering is from the flock, it should be a male without blemish. The person will kill it on the altar's north side, and the priests will dash its blood around the altar. The offering will be cut into pieces, and the priests will arrange them on the altar's fire. The inner parts and legs will be washed with water, and the whole offering will be burned as a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

If the offering is a bird, it should be a turtledove or young pigeon. The priest will bring it to the altar, pinch off its head, and burn it. The blood will be drained on the altar's side. The crop and feathers will be removed and placed beside the altar. The bird will be torn by its wings but not divided, and the priest will burn it on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

For a meal offering, it should be fine flour with oil and frankincense. The priest will take a handful and burn it on the altar as a memorial portion, a pleasing aroma to the LORD. The rest will belong to Aaron and his sons, a most holy offering. If the meal offering is baked, it should be unleavened cakes or wafers with oil. If cooked on a griddle, it should be fine flour with oil, broken into pieces with oil poured over. If cooked in a pan, it should be fine flour with oil. The offering will be brought to the priest, who will present it and burn a memorial portion on the altar. The rest will belong to Aaron and his sons, a most holy offering. No meal offering should contain leaven or honey. All offerings should be seasoned with salt, symbolizing the covenant with God. If the offering is first-fruits, it should be parched corn with oil and frankincense. The priest will burn a memorial portion on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

For peace offerings, whether from the herd or flock, it should be without blemish. The person will lay their hand on the offering's head and kill it at the tent of meeting entrance. The priests will dash its blood around the altar. The fat covering the inner parts, kidneys, and liver lobe will be burned on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the LORD. If the offering is a lamb, the fat tail and other specified parts will be burned. If a goat, the same parts will be burned. The priest will burn these parts on the altar as food for the LORD.The priest will burn the fat on the altar as a food offering, creating a pleasing aroma for the LORD. This rule about not eating fat or blood is to be followed by all generations in all your homes.

**Leviticus Unit II (4:1-5:26)**

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Tell the Israelites that if anyone sins unintentionally by doing something the LORD has forbidden, they must make a sin offering. If the anointed priest sins, bringing guilt upon the people, he must offer a young bull without blemish as a sin offering. He will bring the bull to the entrance of the tent of meeting, lay his hand on its head, and kill it before the LORD. The priest will take some of the bull's blood into the tent of meeting, dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD in front of the veil. He will also put some blood on the horns of the altar of incense and pour the rest at the base of the altar of burnt offering. The priest will remove all the fat, kidneys, and the lobe of the liver, and burn them on the altar. The rest of the bull, including its skin and flesh, will be taken outside the camp to a clean place and burned.

If a leader sins unintentionally, he must offer a male goat without blemish. He will lay his hand on the goat's head and kill it at the place of burnt offerings. The priest will take some of the blood and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, pouring the rest at the base of the altar. The fat will be burned on the altar, and the priest will make atonement for the leader's sin, and he will be forgiven.

If a common person sins unintentionally, they must offer a female goat without blemish. They will lay their hand on the goat's head and kill it at the place of burnt offerings. The priest will take some of the blood and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, pouring the rest at the base of the altar. The fat will be burned on the altar, and the priest will make atonement for the person's sin, and they will be forgiven.

If the whole community of Israel sins unintentionally, they must offer a young bull as a sin offering. The elders will lay their hands on the bull's head, and it will be killed before the LORD. The anointed priest will take some of the blood into the tent of meeting, dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD in front of the veil. He will also put some blood on the horns of the altar of incense and pour the rest at the base of the altar of burnt offering. The fat will be burned on the altar, and the priest will make atonement for the community's sin, and they will be forgiven. The rest of the bull will be taken outside the camp and burned.

If someone brings a lamb as a sin offering, it must be a female without blemish. They will lay their hand on the lamb's head and kill it at the place of burnt offerings. The priest will take some of the blood and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, pouring the rest at the base of the altar. The fat will be burned on the altar, and the priest will make atonement for the person's sin, and they will be forgiven.

If someone hears a public call to testify and fails to do so, they are guilty. If someone touches anything unclean, whether it is an unclean animal or human uncleanness, and it is hidden from them, they are guilty. If someone swears an oath to do something, whether good or evil, and it is hidden from them, they are guilty. When they realize their guilt, they must confess their sin and bring a female from the flock, a lamb or goat, as a sin offering. The priest will make atonement for their sin, and they will be forgiven.

If they cannot afford a lamb, they must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering. The priest will offer the sin offering first, pinching off its head without dividing it, and sprinkle some of the blood on the side of the altar. The rest of the blood will be drained at the base of the altar. The second bird will be prepared as a burnt offering, and the priest will make atonement for their sin, and they will be forgiven.

If they cannot afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, they must bring a tenth of an ephah of fine flour as a sin offering, without oil or frankincense. The priest will take a handful as a memorial portion and burn it on the altar. The rest will belong to the priest, and the person will be forgiven.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "If someone sins unintentionally in regard to any of the LORD's holy things, they must bring a ram without blemish as a guilt offering, along with restitution for the holy thing plus a fifth of its value. The priest will make atonement for them, and they will be forgiven. If someone sins unintentionally by doing something the LORD has forbidden, they must bring a ram without blemish as a guilt offering. The priest will make atonement for them, and they will be forgiven."If someone sins unintentionally and is unaware of it, they must bring a guilt offering to the priest. The priest will make atonement for the unintentional sin, and the person will be forgiven. This is a guilt offering, and the person is certainly guilty before the LORD.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "If anyone sins and commits a trespass against the LORD by deceiving their neighbor regarding a deposit, pledge, robbery, or oppression, or if they find something lost and lie about it, or swear falsely about any such sin, they must restore what they took or gained through deceit. They must add a fifth of its value and give it to the rightful owner on the day they realize their guilt. They must also bring a ram without blemish as a guilt offering to the LORD. The priest will make atonement for them, and they will be forgiven for whatever they did to incur guilt."

**Leviticus Unit III (6:1-7:38)**

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Command Aaron and his sons about the law of the burnt offering. The burnt offering must remain on the altar's hearth all night until morning, and the altar fire must be kept burning. The priest will wear his linen garments and remove the ashes of the burnt offering, placing them beside the altar. Then he will change his clothes and carry the ashes outside the camp to a clean place. The fire on the altar must be kept burning; it must not go out. Every morning, the priest will add wood, arrange the burnt offering, and burn the fat of the peace offerings on it. The fire must be kept burning continuously; it must not go out.

This is the law of the grain offering: Aaron's sons will present it before the LORD in front of the altar. The priest will take a handful of fine flour, oil, and all the frankincense from the grain offering and burn it on the altar as a memorial portion, a pleasing aroma to the LORD. Aaron and his sons will eat the rest of it without yeast in a holy place, in the courtyard of the tent of meeting. It must not be baked with yeast. I have given it as their share of my food offerings. It is most holy, like the sin offering and the guilt offering. Every male descendant of Aaron may eat it. It is their perpetual share from the LORD's food offerings. Whatever touches them will become holy."

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "This is the offering Aaron and his sons must present to the LORD on the day of his anointing: a tenth of an ephah of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half in the morning and half in the evening. It must be prepared with oil on a griddle. Bring it well-mixed and present the grain offering broken in pieces as a pleasing aroma to the LORD. The anointed priest who succeeds him from among his sons will prepare it. It is the LORD's perpetual share and must be completely burned. Every grain offering of a priest must be completely burned; it must not be eaten."

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Speak to Aaron and his sons about the law of the sin offering. The sin offering must be slaughtered before the LORD in the same place as the burnt offering. It is most holy. The priest who offers it for sin will eat it. It must be eaten in a holy place, in the courtyard of the tent of meeting. Whatever touches its flesh will become holy. If any of its blood is splashed on a garment, it must be washed in a holy place. The clay pot in which it is cooked must be broken, but if it is cooked in a bronze pot, the pot must be scoured and rinsed with water. Any male among the priests may eat it; it is most holy. But any sin offering whose blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the Holy Place must not be eaten; it must be burned with fire."

"This is the law of the guilt offering. It is most holy. The guilt offering must be slaughtered in the same place as the burnt offering, and its blood must be splashed against the sides of the altar. All its fat must be offered: the fat tail, the fat covering the internal organs, both kidneys with the fat on them near the loins, and the long lobe of the liver, which must be removed with the kidneys. The priest will burn them on the altar as a food offering to the LORD. It is a guilt offering. Any male among the priests may eat it, but it must be eaten in a holy place; it is most holy. The same law applies to both the sin offering and the guilt offering. The priest who makes atonement with it will have it. The priest who offers a burnt offering for anyone may keep its hide. Every grain offering baked in an oven or cooked in a pan or on a griddle belongs to the priest who offers it. Every grain offering, whether mixed with oil or dry, belongs equally to all the sons of Aaron."

"This is the law of the peace offering that one may present to the LORD. If they offer it as an expression of thankfulness, they must present with the thank offering unleavened cakes mixed with oil, unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes of fine flour well-mixed with oil. Along with their fellowship offering of thanksgiving, they must present an offering with cakes of yeast. They must bring one of each kind as an offering, a contribution to the LORD; it belongs to the priest who splashes the blood of the fellowship offering against the altar. The meat of their fellowship offering of thanksgiving must be eaten on the day it is offered; none of it may be left until morning. If, however, their offering is the result of a vow or is a freewill offering, the sacrifice will be eaten on the day they offer it, but anything left over may be eaten on the next day. Any meat of the sacrifice left over until the third day must be burned up. If any meat of the fellowship offering is eaten on the third day, it will not be accepted. It will not be credited to the one who offered it, for it is impure; the person who eats any of it will be held responsible. Meat that touches anything ceremonially unclean must not be eaten; it must be burned up. As for other meat, anyone ceremonially clean may eat it. But if anyone who is unclean eats any meat of the fellowship offering belonging to the LORD, they must be cut off from their people. Anyone who touches something unclean—whether human uncleanness or an unclean animal or any unclean creature—and then eats any of the meat of the fellowship offering belonging to the LORD must be cut off from their people."

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Say to the Israelites: 'Do not eat any of the fat of cattle, sheep, or goats. The fat of an animal found dead or torn by wild animals may be used for any other purpose, but you must not eat it. Anyone who eats the fat of an animal from which a food offering may be presented to the LORD must be cut off from their people. And wherever you live, you must not eat the blood of any bird or animal. Anyone who eats blood must be cut off from their people.'"

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Say to the Israelites: 'Anyone who brings a fellowship offering to the LORD is to bring part of it as their sacrifice to the LORD. With their own hands, they are to present the food offering to the LORD. They are to bring the fat, together with the breast, and wave the breast before the LORD as a wave offering. The priest will burn the fat on the altar, but the breast belongs to Aaron and his sons. You are to give the right thigh of your fellowship offerings to the priest as a contribution. The son of Aaron who offers the blood and the fat of the fellowship offering will have the right thigh as his share. I have taken the breast that is waved and the thigh that is presented from the Israelites' fellowship offerings and have given them to Aaron the priest and his sons as their perpetual share from the Israelites.'"Aaron and his sons have a perpetual share of the offerings made by fire to the LORD, as commanded by the LORD on the day they were anointed. This is a lasting ordinance for their generations. 

This is the law for the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin offering, the guilt offering, the ordination offering, and the peace offering, which the LORD commanded Moses on Mount Sinai when He instructed the Israelites to bring their offerings in the wilderness of Sinai.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Take Aaron and his sons, along with their garments, the anointing oil, the bull for the sin offering, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread. Gather the entire assembly at the entrance to the tent of meeting." Moses did as the LORD commanded, and the assembly gathered at the entrance to the tent of meeting. Moses said to the assembly, "This is what the LORD has commanded to be done."

On the eighth day, Moses called Aaron, his sons, and the elders of Israel. He said to Aaron, "Take a bull calf for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, both without defect, and present them before the LORD. Tell the Israelites to take a male goat for a sin offering, a calf and a lamb, both a year old and without defect, for a burnt offering, and an ox and a ram for a peace offering to sacrifice before the LORD, along with a grain offering mixed with oil. For today the LORD will appear to you."

They brought what Moses commanded to the front of the tent of meeting, and the entire assembly came near and stood before the LORD. Moses said, "This is what the LORD has commanded you to do, so that the glory of the LORD may appear to you."

Moses brought Aaron and his sons forward and washed them with water. He dressed Aaron in the tunic, tied the sash around him, clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod on him. He fastened the ephod with its skillfully woven waistband, which he tied around him. He placed the breastpiece on him and put the Urim and Thummim in the breastpiece. Then he set the turban on Aaron's head and placed the gold plate, the holy diadem, on the front of the turban, as the LORD commanded Moses.

Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and everything in it, consecrating them. He sprinkled some of the oil on the altar seven times, anointing the altar and all its utensils, the basin with its stand, to consecrate them. He poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron's head to consecrate him. Moses then brought Aaron's sons forward, dressed them in tunics, tied sashes around them, and put headbands on them, as the LORD commanded.

Moses said to Aaron, "Come to the altar and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering to make atonement for yourself and the people. Sacrifice the offering for the people to make atonement for them, as the LORD has commanded."

Aaron came to the altar and slaughtered the calf as a sin offering for himself. His sons brought the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar. He poured out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar. He burned the fat, kidneys, and the long lobe of the liver from the sin offering on the altar, as the LORD commanded Moses. The flesh and hide he burned outside the camp.

Aaron then slaughtered the burnt offering. His sons handed him the blood, and he splashed it against the sides of the altar. They handed him the burnt offering piece by piece, including the head, and he burned them on the altar. He washed the internal organs and the legs and burned them on top of the burnt offering on the altar.

Next, Aaron presented the people's offering. He took the goat for the people's sin offering and slaughtered it, offering it for sin as he did with the first one. He brought the burnt offering and offered it according to the prescribed manner. He also brought the grain offering, took a handful of it, and burned it on the altar in addition to the morning's burnt offering. He slaughtered the ox and the ram as the fellowship offering for the people. His sons handed him the blood, and he splashed it against the sides of the altar. But the fat portions of the ox and the ram—the fat tail, the fat covering the internal organs, the kidneys, and the long lobe of the liver—these they laid on the breasts, and Aaron burned the fat on the altar. Aaron waved the breasts and the right thigh before the LORD as a wave offering, as Moses commanded.

Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood from the altar and sprinkled it on Aaron and his garments, and on his sons and their garments. So he consecrated Aaron and his garments, and his sons and their garments. Moses said to Aaron and his sons, "Cook the meat at the entrance to the tent of meeting and eat it there with the bread from the basket of ordination offerings, as I was commanded: 'Aaron and his sons are to eat it.' Then burn up the rest of the meat and the bread. Do not leave the entrance to the tent of meeting for seven days, until the days of your ordination are completed, for your ordination will last seven days. What has been done today was commanded by the LORD to make atonement for you. You must stay at the entrance to the tent of meeting day and night for seven days and keep the LORD's charge so that you will not die, for that is what I have been commanded." So Aaron and his sons did everything the LORD commanded through Moses.

Aaron lifted his hands toward the people and blessed them. Having sacrificed the sin offering, the burnt offering, and the fellowship offering, he stepped down. Moses and Aaron then went into the tent of meeting. When they came out, they blessed the people, and the glory of the LORD appeared to all the people. Fire came out from the presence of the LORD and consumed the burnt offering and the fat portions on the altar. When all the people saw it, they shouted for joy and fell facedown.On the eighth day, Moses called Aaron, his sons, and the elders of Israel. He instructed Aaron to take a bull calf for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, both without defects, and present them before the LORD. He also told the Israelites to bring a male goat for a sin offering, a calf and a lamb, both a year old and without defects, for a burnt offering, and an ox and a ram for a peace offering, along with a grain offering mixed with oil. Moses said, "Today the LORD will appear to you."

They brought what Moses commanded to the front of the tent of meeting, and the entire assembly stood before the LORD. Moses said, "This is what the LORD has commanded you to do so that His glory may appear to you."

Moses brought Aaron and his sons forward and washed them with water. He dressed Aaron in the tunic, tied the sash around him, clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod on him. He fastened the ephod with its skillfully woven waistband, which he tied around him. He placed the breastpiece on him and put the Urim and Thummim in the breastpiece. Then he set the turban on Aaron's head and placed the gold plate, the holy diadem, on the front of the turban, as the LORD commanded Moses.

Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and everything in it, consecrating them. He sprinkled some of the oil on the altar seven times, anointing the altar and all its utensils, the basin with its stand, to consecrate them. He poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron's head to consecrate him. Moses then brought Aaron's sons forward, dressed them in tunics, tied sashes around them, and put headbands on them, as the LORD commanded.

Moses said to Aaron, "Come to the altar and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering to make atonement for yourself and the people. Sacrifice the offering for the people to make atonement for them, as the LORD has commanded."

Aaron came to the altar and slaughtered the calf as a sin offering for himself. His sons brought the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar. He poured out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar. He burned the fat, kidneys, and the long lobe of the liver from the sin offering on the altar, as the LORD commanded Moses. The flesh and hide he burned outside the camp.

Aaron then slaughtered the burnt offering. His sons handed him the blood, and he splashed it against the sides of the altar. They handed him the burnt offering piece by piece, including the head, and he burned them on the altar. He washed the internal organs and the legs and burned them on top of the burnt offering on the altar.

Next, Aaron presented the people's offering. He took the goat for the people's sin offering and slaughtered it, offering it for sin as he did with the first one. He brought the burnt offering and offered it according to the prescribed manner. He also brought the grain offering, took a handful of it, and burned it on the altar in addition to the morning's burnt offering. He slaughtered the ox and the ram as the fellowship offering for the people. His sons handed him the blood, and he splashed it against the sides of the altar. But the fat portions of the ox and the ram—the fat tail, the fat covering the internal organs, the kidneys, and the long lobe of the liver—these they laid on the breasts, and Aaron burned the fat on the altar. Aaron waved the breasts and the right thigh before the LORD as a wave offering, as Moses commanded.

Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood from the altar and sprinkled it on Aaron and his garments, and on his sons and their garments. So he consecrated Aaron and his garments, and his sons and their garments. Moses said to Aaron and his sons, "Cook the meat at the entrance to the tent of meeting and eat it there with the bread from the basket of ordination offerings, as I was commanded: 'Aaron and his sons are to eat it.' Then burn up the rest of the meat and the bread. Do not leave the entrance to the tent of meeting for seven days, until the days of your ordination are completed, for your ordination will last seven days. What has been done today was commanded by the LORD to make atonement for you. You must stay at the entrance to the tent of meeting day and night for seven days and keep the LORD's charge so that you will not die, for that is what I have been commanded." So Aaron and his sons did everything the LORD commanded through Moses.

Aaron lifted his hands toward the people and blessed them. Having sacrificed the sin offering, the burnt offering, and the fellowship offering, he stepped down. Moses and Aaron then went into the tent of meeting. When they came out, they blessed the people, and the glory of the LORD appeared to all the people. Fire came out from the presence of the LORD and consumed the burnt offering and the fat portions on the altar. When all the people saw it, they shouted for joy and fell facedown.

However, Nadab and Abihu, Aaron's sons, offered unauthorized fire before the LORD, which He had not commanded them. Fire came out from the LORD and consumed them, and they died before the LORD. Moses said to Aaron, "This is what the LORD meant when He said: 'Among those who approach me, I will be proved holy; in the sight of all the people, I will be honored.'" Aaron remained silent.

Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, sons of Aaron's uncle Uzziel, and told them to carry their cousins outside the camp. They did as Moses instructed. Moses then told Aaron and his remaining sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, not to let their hair become unkempt or tear their clothes, or they would die and bring wrath upon the whole community. Instead, the whole house of Israel should mourn for those the LORD had burned. They were not to leave the entrance to the tent of meeting, or they would die, for the LORD's anointing oil was upon them. They obeyed Moses' instructions.

Moses then told Aaron and his sons to take the remaining grain offering and eat it without yeast beside the altar, for it was most holy. They were to eat it in a holy place because it was their share of the offerings made by fire to the LORD. The breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the heave offering were to be eaten in a clean place by Aaron, his sons, and daughters, as they were given as their share of the peace offerings of the Israelites. The thigh and breast were to be brought with the fat portions of the offerings made by fire to be waved before the LORD as a wave offering, and they were to be Aaron's and his sons' share forever, as the LORD commanded.

The LORD spoke to Aaron, saying, "You and your sons must not drink wine or other fermented drink whenever you go into the tent of meeting, or you will die. This is a lasting ordinance for the generations to come. You must distinguish between the holy and the common, between the unclean and the clean, and teach the Israelites all the decrees the LORD has given them through Moses."

Moses inquired about the goat of the sin offering and found that it had been burned up. He was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's remaining sons, and asked why they had not eaten the sin offering in the sanctuary area, as it was most holy and given to them to take away the guilt of the community and make atonement for them before the LORD. Aaron explained that such tragic events had happened to him that day, and if he had eaten the sin offering, it would not have been pleasing to the LORD. Moses accepted Aaron's explanation.

The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, instructing them to tell the Israelites which animals they could eat. They could eat any animal that has a split hoof completely divided and that chews the cud. However, they were not to eat animals like the camel, the rock hyrax, the rabbit, or the pig, as they were unclean. They were also instructed on which creatures in the waters, birds, and swarming things were clean or unclean and how to handle their carcasses to avoid becoming unclean.

The LORD also gave instructions on how to handle the carcasses of unclean animals and what to do if they fell on various items, such as food, drink, or cooking utensils. These items would become unclean and needed to be cleaned or broken, depending on the material.

The LORD emphasized the importance of distinguishing between the clean and unclean and being holy because He is holy. He reminded the Israelites that He brought them out of Egypt to be their God, and they must be holy as He is holy.If a woman gives birth to a son, she will be ceremonially unclean for seven days, just as she is during her monthly period. On the eighth day, the boy is to be circumcised. She must then wait 33 days to be purified from her bleeding. During this time, she must not touch anything sacred or go to the sanctuary until her purification is complete. If she gives birth to a daughter, she will be unclean for two weeks, as during her period, and must wait 66 days to be purified from her bleeding.

When her purification period is over, whether for a son or a daughter, she must bring a year-old lamb for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or a dove for a sin offering to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. The priest will offer them before the LORD to make atonement for her, and she will be ceremonially clean from her bleeding. This is the law for a woman who gives birth to a son or a daughter. If she cannot afford a lamb, she is to bring two doves or two young pigeons, one for a burnt offering and the other for a sin offering. The priest will make atonement for her, and she will be clean.

The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: When someone has a swelling, a rash, or a bright spot on their skin that could be a defiling skin disease, they must be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons who is a priest. The priest is to examine the sore on the skin, and if the hair in the sore has turned white and the sore appears to be more than skin deep, it is a defiling skin disease. When the priest examines that person, he shall pronounce them ceremonially unclean.

If the spot on the skin is white but does not appear to be more than skin deep and the hair in it has not turned white, the priest is to isolate the affected person for seven days. On the seventh day, the priest is to examine them, and if he sees that the sore is unchanged and has not spread in the skin, he is to isolate them for another seven days. On the seventh day, the priest is to examine them again, and if the sore has faded and has not spread in the skin, the priest shall pronounce them clean; it is only a rash. They must wash their clothes, and they will be clean. But if the rash does spread in their skin after they have shown themselves to the priest to be pronounced clean, they must appear before the priest again. The priest is to examine them, and if the rash has spread in the skin, he shall pronounce them unclean; it is a defiling skin disease.

When someone has a boil on their skin and it heals, and in the place where the boil was, a white swelling or a reddish-white spot appears, they must present themselves to the priest. The priest is to examine it, and if it appears to be more than skin deep and the hair in it has turned white, the priest shall pronounce them unclean. It is a defiling skin disease that has broken out where the boil was. But if, when the priest examines it, there is no white hair in it and it is not more than skin deep and has faded, then the priest is to isolate them for seven days. If it is spreading in the skin, the priest shall pronounce them unclean; it is a defiling disease. But if the spot is unchanged and has not spread, it is only a scar from the boil, and the priest shall pronounce them clean.

When someone has a burn on their skin and a reddish-white or white spot appears in the raw flesh of the burn, the priest is to examine the spot, and if the hair in it has turned white and it appears to be more than skin deep, it is a defiling disease that has broken out in the burn. The priest shall pronounce them unclean; it is a defiling skin disease. But if the priest examines it and there is no white hair in the spot and it is not more than skin deep and has faded, the priest is to isolate them for seven days. On the seventh day, the priest is to examine them, and if it is spreading in the skin, the priest shall pronounce them unclean; it is a defiling skin disease. If the spot is unchanged and has not spread in the skin but has faded, it is only a swelling from the burn, and the priest shall pronounce them clean; it is only a scar from the burn.

If a man or woman has a sore on their head or chin, the priest is to examine the sore, and if it appears to be more than skin deep and the hair in it is yellow and thin, the priest shall pronounce them unclean; it is a defiling skin disease on the head or chin. But if, when the priest examines the sore, it does not appear to be more than skin deep and there is no black hair in it, the priest is to isolate the affected person for seven days. On the seventh day, the priest is to examine the sore, and if it has not spread and there is no yellow hair in it and it does not appear to be more than skin deep, the person must shave themselves except for the sore, and the priest is to isolate them for another seven days. On the seventh day, the priest is to examine the sore, and if it has not spread in the skin and does not appear to be more than skin deep, the priest shall pronounce them clean. They must wash their clothes, and they will be clean. But if the sore does spread in the skin after they are pronounced clean, the priest is to examine them, and if he finds that the sore has spread in the skin, he does not need to look for yellow hair; the person is unclean. If, however, the sore is unchanged and black hair has grown in it, the sore is healed, and the person is clean. The priest shall pronounce them clean.

If a man loses the hair of his head, he is bald but he is clean. If he loses the hair on the front of his head, he is bald on the forehead but he is clean. But if he has a reddish-white sore on his bald head or forehead, it is a defiling disease breaking out on his head or forehead. The priest is to examine him, and if the swollen sore on his head or forehead is reddish-white like a defiling skin disease, the man is diseased and is unclean. The priest shall pronounce him unclean because of the sore on his head.

Anyone with such a defiling disease must wear torn clothes, let their hair be unkempt, cover the lower part of their face, and cry out, 'Unclean! Unclean!' As long as they have the disease, they remain unclean. They must live alone; they must live outside the camp.

If a defiling disease appears in a piece of clothing, whether it is woolen or linen clothing, woven or knitted material of linen or wool, or leather or anything made of leather, and if the disease in the clothing, leather, woven or knitted material, or any leather article is greenish or reddish, it is a defiling disease and must be shown to the priest. The priest is to examine the affected article and isolate it for seven days. On the seventh day, he is to examine it, and if the disease has spread in the clothing, woven or knitted material, or leather, whatever its use, it is a persistent defiling disease; the article is unclean. He must burn the clothing, woven or knitted material of wool or linen, or any leather article that has the disease, because the defiling disease is persistent; the article must be burned.If a priest examines a piece of clothing, leather, woven or knitted material, and finds a greenish or reddish spot, he will isolate it for seven days. If the spot hasn't changed color or spread after washing, the item is unclean and must be burned. If the spot fades after washing, the affected part should be cut out. If the spot reappears, the item must be burned. If the spot disappears after washing, the item should be washed again and will be clean.

This is the procedure for dealing with a defiling skin disease in clothing or leather. 

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying that when someone with a skin disease is healed, they must be brought to the priest. The priest will examine them outside the camp. If the disease is healed, the priest will perform a cleansing ritual involving two live clean birds, cedar wood, scarlet yarn, and hyssop. One bird is killed over fresh water, and the living bird, along with the cedar wood, scarlet yarn, and hyssop, is dipped in the blood of the killed bird. The priest will sprinkle the blood on the person seven times and pronounce them clean, then release the living bird into the open field.

The person being cleansed must wash their clothes, shave off all their hair, and bathe in water. They can then return to the camp but must stay outside their tent for seven days. On the seventh day, they must shave off all their hair again, wash their clothes, and bathe in water to be clean.

On the eighth day, they must bring two male lambs without defect, one ewe lamb, fine flour mixed with oil, and a log of oil to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. The priest will offer one lamb as a guilt offering, wave it before the LORD, and kill it in the holy place. The priest will put some of the blood on the right ear, thumb, and big toe of the person being cleansed. The priest will also sprinkle oil seven times before the LORD and put some on the right ear, thumb, and big toe of the person, along with the remaining oil on their head.

The priest will then offer a sin offering and a burnt offering to make atonement for the person. If the person is poor, they can bring one male lamb, fine flour mixed with oil, and two doves or pigeons. The priest will follow the same procedure to make atonement.

This is the law for anyone with a defiling skin disease who cannot afford the regular offerings.

The LORD also spoke to Moses and Aaron about what to do when they enter the land of Canaan and find a defiling disease in a house. The owner must report it to the priest, who will order the house to be emptied before examining it. If the disease is found in the walls, the house will be closed for seven days. If the disease spreads, the affected stones must be removed and the house scraped and replastered. If the disease reappears, the house must be demolished. If the disease does not spread, the house is clean after being replastered.

To cleanse the house, the priest will use two birds, cedar wood, scarlet yarn, and hyssop, following the same procedure as for a person. This is the law for any defiling disease in a house or clothing.This section outlines the laws regarding various bodily discharges and their associated impurities:

1. If a man has a discharge from his body, he is considered unclean. This includes any flow or stoppage of the discharge.
2. Anything he lies or sits on becomes unclean. Anyone who touches these items must wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening.
3. If someone touches the man with the discharge, they must also wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening.
4. If the man with the discharge spits on someone, that person must wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening.
5. Any saddle the man with the discharge rides on becomes unclean.
6. Anyone who touches anything under the man with the discharge must wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening.
7. If the man with the discharge touches someone without washing his hands, that person must wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening.
8. Any clay pot touched by the man with the discharge must be broken, and any wooden item must be rinsed in water.
9. Once the man with the discharge is cleansed, he must wait seven days, wash his clothes, bathe in running water, and then he will be clean.
10. On the eighth day, he must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. The priest will offer one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to make atonement for him.

For other discharges:
1. If a man has a seminal emission, he must bathe his entire body in water and remain unclean until evening. Any clothing or leather touched by the emission must be washed and remain unclean until evening.
2. If a man has sexual relations with a woman, both must bathe in water and remain unclean until evening.
3. If a woman has her menstrual period, she is unclean for seven days. Anyone who touches her or anything she lies or sits on must wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening.
4. If a woman has a discharge of blood outside her menstrual period, she is unclean as long as the discharge continues. The same rules apply to anything she lies or sits on.
5. Once she is cleansed, she must wait seven days, and on the eighth day, she must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest. The priest will offer one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to make atonement for her.

These laws are meant to separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness to prevent them from defiling the tabernacle.

The LORD also spoke to Moses after the death of Aaron's two sons, instructing him to tell Aaron not to enter the Most Holy Place whenever he chooses, lest he die. Aaron must bring a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering. He must wear holy linen garments and bathe before putting them on. He will take two goats from the community for a sin offering and one ram for a burnt offering. Aaron will cast lots for the two goats, one for the LORD and the other for Azazel. The goat for the LORD will be sacrificed as a sin offering, and the goat for Azazel will be sent into the wilderness to carry away the sins of the people.

Aaron will make atonement for himself and his household with the bull's blood and then for the people with the goat's blood. He will sprinkle the blood on the atonement cover and in front of it. He will also make atonement for the altar by sprinkling it with the blood of the bull and the goat. After making atonement, he will send the live goat into the wilderness, symbolically carrying away the people's sins.

Aaron will then remove his linen garments, bathe, and put on his regular garments. He will offer the burnt offerings for himself and the people, making atonement for them. The fat of the sin offering will be burned on the altar. The person who releases the goat for Azazel must wash his clothes and bathe before returning to the camp. The remains of the sin offerings will be taken outside the camp and burned.The remains of the sin offering, whose blood was used for atonement in the holy place, must be taken outside the camp and burned, including their skins, flesh, and waste. The person who burns them must wash their clothes and bathe in water before returning to the camp.

This is a permanent rule: on the tenth day of the seventh month, you must humble yourselves and do no work, whether native-born or a foreigner living among you. On this day, atonement will be made for you to cleanse you from all your sins before the LORD. It is a Sabbath of solemn rest, and you must humble yourselves. This is a lasting ordinance.

The priest who is anointed and ordained to succeed his father must make atonement, wearing the holy linen garments. He will make atonement for the Most Holy Place, the tent of meeting, the altar, the priests, and all the people of the assembly. This is an everlasting statute to make atonement for the Israelites once a year for all their sins, as the LORD commanded Moses.

In Leviticus Unit XI (17:1-16), the LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites that anyone who kills an ox, lamb, or goat in or outside the camp without bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting as an offering to the LORD will be considered guilty of shedding blood and will be cut off from the people. This is to ensure that the Israelites bring their sacrifices to the LORD at the tent of meeting, where the priest will sprinkle the blood on the altar and burn the fat as a pleasing aroma to the LORD. They must no longer offer sacrifices to goat idols, a practice they have followed. This is a lasting ordinance.

Anyone, whether an Israelite or a foreigner living among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice without bringing it to the tent of meeting will be cut off from the people. Anyone who eats blood will have the LORD's face set against them and will be cut off from the people, for the life of the flesh is in the blood, and it is given on the altar to make atonement for souls. Therefore, no one among the Israelites or foreigners living among them may eat blood.

Anyone who hunts and catches an animal or bird that may be eaten must drain its blood and cover it with dust, for the life of all flesh is in its blood. Anyone who eats an animal that died naturally or was torn by beasts, whether native-born or a foreigner, must wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening; then they will be clean. If they do not wash their clothes and bathe, they will bear their guilt.

In Leviticus Unit XII (18:1-30), the LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell the Israelites that they must not follow the practices of Egypt, where they lived, or Canaan, where they are going. They must follow the LORD's ordinances and statutes to live by them. The LORD is their God.

None of you shall have sexual relations with a close relative. This includes not uncovering the nakedness of your father, mother, father's wife, sister, son's daughter, daughter's daughter, father's wife's daughter, father's sister, mother's sister, father's brother's wife, daughter-in-law, brother's wife, a woman and her daughter, or a woman and her granddaughter. You must not take a woman as a rival to her sister while the sister is alive. You must not approach a woman to have sexual relations during her menstrual impurity. You must not have sexual relations with your neighbor's wife or offer any of your children to Molech, profaning the name of your God. You must not have sexual relations with a man as with a woman; it is an abomination. You must not have sexual relations with an animal, nor shall a woman present herself to an animal to mate with it; it is perversion.

Do not defile yourselves with any of these practices, for the nations that the LORD is driving out before you have defiled themselves with these things, and the land became defiled. Therefore, the LORD punished its iniquity, and the land vomited out its inhabitants. You must keep the LORD's statutes and ordinances and not commit any of these abominations, whether native-born or a foreigner living among you. If you defile the land, it will vomit you out as it vomited out the nations before you. Anyone who commits any of these abominations will be cut off from their people. Therefore, keep the LORD's charge and do not follow these abominable customs, so you do not defile yourselves. The LORD is your God.

In Leviticus Unit XIII (19:1-37), the LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell the entire assembly of Israel to be holy because the LORD their God is holy. They must not steal, deal falsely, or lie to one another. They must not swear falsely by the LORD's name, profaning it. They must respect their mother and father and keep the LORD's Sabbaths. They must not oppress their neighbor or rob them. The wages of a hired worker must not remain with them overnight. They must not curse the deaf or put a stumbling block before the blind but fear their God. They must not turn to idols or make molten gods. They must judge their neighbor righteously, not showing partiality to the poor or favoritism to the great. They must not go about spreading slander or stand idly by while their neighbor's life is in danger.This is a permanent rule: on the tenth day of the seventh month, you must humble yourselves and do no work, whether native-born or a foreigner living among you. On this day, atonement will be made for you to cleanse you from all your sins before the LORD. It is a Sabbath of solemn rest, and you must humble yourselves. This is a lasting ordinance.

The priest who is anointed and ordained to succeed his father must make atonement, wearing the holy linen garments. He will make atonement for the Most Holy Place, the tent of meeting, the altar, the priests, and all the people of the assembly. This is an everlasting statute to make atonement for the Israelites once a year for all their sins, as the LORD commanded Moses.

In Leviticus Unit XI (17:1-16), the LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites that anyone who kills an ox, lamb, or goat in or outside the camp without bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting as an offering to the LORD will be considered guilty of shedding blood and will be cut off from the people. This is to ensure that the Israelites bring their sacrifices to the LORD at the tent of meeting, where the priest will sprinkle the blood on the altar and burn the fat as a pleasing aroma to the LORD. They must no longer offer sacrifices to goat idols, a practice they have followed. This is a lasting ordinance.

Anyone, whether an Israelite or a foreigner living among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice without bringing it to the tent of meeting will be cut off from the people. Anyone who eats blood will have the LORD's face set against them and will be cut off from the people, for the life of the flesh is in the blood, and it is given on the altar to make atonement for souls. Therefore, no one among the Israelites or foreigners living among them may eat blood.

Anyone who hunts and catches an animal or bird that may be eaten must drain its blood and cover it with dust, for the life of all flesh is in its blood. Anyone who eats an animal that died naturally or was torn by beasts, whether native-born or a foreigner, must wash their clothes, bathe in water, and remain unclean until evening; then they will be clean. If they do not wash their clothes and bathe, they will bear their guilt.

In Leviticus Unit XII (18:1-30), the LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell the Israelites that they must not follow the practices of Egypt, where they lived, or Canaan, where they are going. They must follow the LORD's ordinances and statutes to live by them. The LORD is their God.

None of you shall have sexual relations with a close relative. This includes not uncovering the nakedness of your father, mother, father's wife, sister, son's daughter, daughter's daughter, father's wife's daughter, father's sister, mother's sister, father's brother's wife, daughter-in-law, brother's wife, a woman and her daughter, or a woman and her granddaughter. You must not take a woman as a rival to her sister while the sister is alive. You must not approach a woman to have sexual relations during her menstrual impurity. You must not have sexual relations with your neighbor's wife or offer any of your children to Molech, profaning the name of your God. You must not have sexual relations with a man as with a woman; it is an abomination. You must not have sexual relations with an animal, nor shall a woman present herself to an animal to mate with it; it is perversion.

Do not defile yourselves with any of these practices, for the nations that the LORD is driving out before you have defiled themselves with these things, and the land became defiled. Therefore, the LORD punished its iniquity, and the land vomited out its inhabitants. You must keep the LORD's statutes and ordinances and not commit any of these abominations, whether native-born or a foreigner living among you. If you defile the land, it will vomit you out as it vomited out the nations before you. Anyone who commits any of these abominations will be cut off from their people. Therefore, keep the LORD's charge and do not follow these abominable customs, so you do not defile yourselves. The LORD is your God.

In Leviticus Unit XIII (19:1-37), the LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell the entire assembly of Israel to be holy because the LORD their God is holy. They must not steal, deal falsely, or lie to one another. They must not swear falsely by the LORD's name, profaning it. They must respect their mother and father and keep the LORD's Sabbaths. They must not oppress their neighbor or rob them. The wages of a hired worker must not remain with them overnight. They must not curse the deaf or put a stumbling block before the blind but fear their God. They must not turn to idols or make molten gods. They must judge their neighbor righteously, not showing partiality to the poor or favoritism to the great. They must not go about spreading slander or stand idly by while their neighbor's life is in danger.

Anyone who eats it will bear their guilt because they have profaned the holy thing of the LORD; they will be cut off from their people. When you reap the harvest of your land, do not reap to the very edges of your field or gather the gleanings of your harvest. Do not go over your vineyard a second time or pick up the grapes that have fallen. Leave them for the poor and the foreigner. I am the LORD your God.

Do not hate your brother in your heart. Rebuke your neighbor frankly so you will not share in their guilt. Do not seek revenge or bear a grudge against anyone among your people, but love your neighbor as yourself. I am the LORD.

Keep my decrees. Do not mate different kinds of animals. Do not plant your field with two kinds of seed. Do not wear clothing woven of two kinds of material. If a man has sexual relations with a woman who is a slave promised to another man but who has not been ransomed or given her freedom, there must be due punishment. Yet they are not to be put to death, because she had not been freed. The man must bring a ram to the entrance to the tent of meeting for a guilt offering to the LORD. The priest will make atonement for him with the ram before the LORD for the sin he has committed, and his sin will be forgiven.

When you enter the land and plant any kind of fruit tree, regard its fruit as forbidden. For three years you are to consider it forbidden; it must not be eaten. In the fourth year all its fruit will be holy, an offering of praise to the LORD. But in the fifth year you may eat its fruit. In this way, your harvest will be increased. I am the LORD your God.

Do not eat any meat with the blood still in it. Do not practice divination or seek omens. Do not cut the hair at the sides of your head or clip off the edges of your beard. Do not cut your bodies for the dead or put tattoo marks on yourselves. I am the LORD.

Stand up in the presence of the aged, show respect for the elderly, and revere your God. I am the LORD.

Do not degrade your daughter by making her a prostitute, or the land will turn to prostitution and be filled with wickedness. Observe my Sabbaths and have reverence for my sanctuary. I am the LORD.

Do not mistreat foreigners residing in your land. Treat them as native-born and love them as yourself, for you were foreigners in Egypt. I am the LORD your God.

Do not turn to mediums or seek out spiritists, for you will be defiled by them. I am the LORD your God.

Do not use dishonest standards when measuring length, weight, or quantity. Use honest scales and honest weights, an honest ephah and an honest hin. I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of Egypt. Keep all my decrees and all my laws and follow them. I am the LORD.

In Leviticus Unit XIV (20:1-27), the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: Tell the Israelites: Any Israelite or foreigner residing in Israel who sacrifices any of his children to Molech is to be put to death. The members of the community are to stone him. I myself will set my face against him and will cut him off from his people; for by sacrificing his children to Molech, he has defiled my sanctuary and profaned my holy name. If the members of the community close their eyes when that man sacrifices one of his children to Molech and if they fail to put him to death, I myself will set my face against him and his family and will cut them off from their people, together with all who follow him in prostituting themselves to Molech.

I will set my face against anyone who turns to mediums and spiritists to prostitute themselves by following them, and I will cut them off from their people. Consecrate yourselves and be holy, because I am the LORD your God. Keep my decrees and follow them. I am the LORD, who makes you holy.

Anyone who curses their father or mother is to be put to death. Because they have cursed their father or mother, their blood will be on their own head.

If a man commits adultery with another man's wife—with the wife of his neighbor—both the adulterer and the adulteress are to be put to death. If a man has sexual relations with his father's wife, he has dishonored his father. Both the man and the woman are to be put to death; their blood will be on their own heads. If a man has sexual relations with his daughter-in-law, both of them are to be put to death. What they have done is a perversion; their blood will be on their own heads. If a man has sexual relations with a man as one does with a woman, both of them have done what is detestable. They are to be put to death; their blood will be on their own heads. If a man marries both a woman and her mother, it is wicked. Both he and they must be burned in the fire, so that no wickedness will be among you. If a man has sexual relations with an animal, he is to be put to death, and you must kill the animal. If a woman approaches an animal to have sexual relations with it, kill both the woman and the animal. They are to be put to death; their blood will be on their own heads.

If a man marries his sister, the daughter of either his father or his mother, and they have sexual relations, it is a disgrace. They are to be publicly removed from their people. He has dishonored his sister and will be held responsible. If a man has sexual relations with a woman during her monthly period, he has exposed the source of her flow, and she has also uncovered it. Both of them are to be cut off from their people. Do not have sexual relations with the sister of either your mother or your father, for that would dishonor a close relative; both of you would be held responsible. If a man has sexual relations with his aunt, he has dishonored his uncle. They will be held responsible; they will die childless. If a man marries his brother's wife, it is an act of impurity; he has dishonored his brother. They will be childless.

Keep all my decrees and laws and follow them, so that the land where I am bringing you to live may not vomit you out. You must not live according to the customs of the nations I am going to drive out before you. Because they did all these things, I abhorred them. But I said to you, "You will possess their land; I will give it to you as an inheritance, a land flowing with milk and honey." I am the LORD your God, who has set you apart from the nations.

You must therefore make a distinction between clean and unclean animals and between unclean and clean birds. Do not defile yourselves by any animal or bird or anything that moves along the ground—those that I have set apart as unclean for you. You are to be holy to me because I, the LORD, am holy, and I have set you apart from the nations to be my own.

A man or woman who is a medium or spiritist among you must be put to death. You are to stone them; their blood will be on their own heads.

In Leviticus Unit XV (21:1-24), the LORD said to Moses: Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them: A priest must not make himself ceremonially unclean for any of his people who die, except for a close relative, such as his mother or father, his son or daughter, his brother, or an unmarried sister who is dependent on him since she has no husband. For her, he may make himself unclean. He must not make himself unclean for people related to him by marriage and so defile himself.

Priests must not shave their heads or shave off the edges of their beards or cut their bodies. They must be holy to their God and must not profane the name of their God. Because they present the food offerings to the LORD, the food of their God, they are to be holy.

They must not marry women defiled by prostitution or divorced from their husbands, because priests are holy to their God. Regard them as holy, because they offer up the food of your God. Consider them holy, because I the LORD am holy—I who make you holy.

If a priest's daughter defiles herself by becoming a prostitute, she disgraces her father; she must be burned in the fire.

The high priest, the one among his brothers who has had the anointing oil poured on his head and who has been ordained to wear the priestly garments, must not let his hair become unkempt or tear his clothes. He must not enter a place where there is a dead body. He must not make himself unclean, even for his father or mother, nor leave the sanctuary of his God or desecrate it, because he has been dedicated by the anointing oil of his God. I am the LORD.The anointing of his God is upon him: I am the LORD. 

A priest must marry a virgin from his own people. He should not marry a widow, a divorced woman, a defiled woman, or a prostitute. This ensures that his descendants remain holy, as I am the LORD who sanctifies him.

The LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell Aaron that any of his descendants with a physical defect should not approach to offer the bread of God. This includes anyone who is blind, lame, disfigured, or deformed, or has a broken foot or hand, a hunchback, dwarfism, an eye defect, skin disease, or damaged testicles. Such individuals may eat the holy food but must not approach the veil or the altar to avoid desecrating the holy places, as I am the LORD who sanctifies them.

Moses conveyed these instructions to Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites.

The LORD spoke to Moses again, instructing him to tell Aaron and his sons to treat the holy offerings of the Israelites with respect and not to profane His holy name. Anyone who approaches the holy offerings while unclean will be cut off from God's presence. This includes those with skin diseases, discharges, or those who have touched anything unclean, such as a dead body or certain insects. They must bathe and wait until evening to be clean and then may eat the holy food.

Priests must not eat animals that died naturally or were killed by other animals, as this would defile them. They must follow these rules to avoid sin and death, as I am the LORD who sanctifies them.

No outsider may eat the holy food, but a priest's purchased servant or those born in his house may. If a priest's daughter marries an outsider, she may not eat the holy food, but if she becomes a widow or is divorced and returns to her father's house without children, she may eat it again.

If someone eats the holy food by mistake, they must repay it with an additional fifth. The holy offerings must not be profaned, as this would bring guilt upon the people. I am the LORD who sanctifies them.

The LORD instructed Moses to tell Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites that any offering brought to the LORD must be without defect to be accepted. This includes offerings for vows or freewill offerings. Animals with defects such as blindness, broken bones, or skin diseases are not acceptable. However, a bull or lamb with a minor defect may be offered as a freewill offering but not for a vow.

Offerings must not come from foreigners, as their animals may have defects. The LORD also instructed that newborn animals must stay with their mother for seven days and can be offered from the eighth day onward. Animals and their young must not be killed on the same day.

Thanksgiving sacrifices must be eaten on the same day and not left until morning. The LORD's commandments must be followed to avoid profaning His holy name, as He is the LORD who sanctifies and brought the Israelites out of Egypt to be their God.Do not harvest the edges of your field or gather the leftovers from your harvest. Leave them for the poor and the foreigner. I am the LORD your God.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Tell the Israelites that on the first day of the seventh month, you are to have a day of rest, a sacred assembly commemorated with trumpet blasts. Do no regular work and present a food offering to the LORD."

The LORD spoke to Moses again, saying: "On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, the LORD's Festival of Tabernacles begins, and it lasts for seven days. The first day is a sacred assembly; do no regular work. For seven days, present food offerings to the LORD, and on the eighth day hold a sacred assembly and present a food offering to the LORD. It is the closing special assembly; do no regular work."

These are the LORD's appointed festivals, which you are to proclaim as sacred assemblies for bringing food offerings to the LORD—burnt offerings and grain offerings, sacrifices and drink offerings required for each day. These offerings are in addition to those for the LORD's Sabbaths and in addition to your gifts and whatever you have vowed and all the freewill offerings you give to the LORD.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "On the tenth day of the seventh month is the Day of Atonement. Hold a sacred assembly and deny yourselves, and present a food offering to the LORD. Do no work on that day because it is the Day of Atonement, when atonement is made for you before the LORD your God. Anyone who does not deny themselves on that day must be cut off from their people. I will destroy anyone among you who does any work on that day. You shall do no work at all. This is to be a lasting ordinance for the generations to come, wherever you live. It is a day of sabbath rest for you, and you must deny yourselves. From the evening of the ninth day of the month until the following evening, you are to observe your sabbath."

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, after you have gathered the crops of the land, celebrate the festival to the LORD for seven days; the first day is a day of rest, and the eighth day also is a day of rest. On the first day, you are to take branches from luxuriant trees—from palms, willows, and other leafy trees—and rejoice before the LORD your God for seven days. Celebrate this as a festival to the LORD for seven days each year. This is to be a lasting ordinance for the generations to come; celebrate it in the seventh month. Live in temporary shelters for seven days: All native-born Israelites are to live in such shelters so your descendants will know that I had the Israelites live in temporary shelters when I brought them out of Egypt. I am the LORD your God."

So Moses announced to the Israelites the appointed festivals of the LORD.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: "Command the Israelites to bring you clear oil of pressed olives for the light so that the lamps may be kept burning continually. Outside the curtain that shields the ark of the covenant law in the tent of meeting, Aaron is to tend the lamps before the LORD from evening till morning, continually. This is to be a lasting ordinance for the generations to come. The lamps on the pure gold lampstand before the LORD must be tended continually.

Take the finest flour and bake twelve loaves of bread, using two-tenths of an ephah for each loaf. Arrange them in two stacks, six in each stack, on the table of pure gold before the LORD. By each stack, put some pure incense as a memorial portion to represent the bread and to be a food offering presented to the LORD. This bread is to be set out before the LORD regularly, Sabbath after Sabbath, on behalf of the Israelites, as a lasting covenant. It belongs to Aaron and his sons, who are to eat it in the sanctuary area because it is a most holy part of their perpetual share of the food offerings presented to the LORD."

Now the son of an Israelite mother and an Egyptian father went out among the Israelites, and a fight broke out in the camp between him and an Israelite. The son of the Israelite woman blasphemed the Name with a curse; so they brought him to Moses. (His mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri the Danite.) They put him in custody until the will of the LORD should be made clear to them.

Then the LORD said to Moses: "Take the blasphemer outside the camp. All those who heard him are to lay their hands on his head, and the entire assembly is to stone him. Say to the Israelites: 'Anyone who curses their God will be held responsible; anyone who blasphemes the name of the LORD is to be put to death. The entire assembly must stone them. Whether foreigner or native-born, when they blaspheme the Name, they are to be put to death.

Anyone who takes the life of a human being is to be put to death. Anyone who takes the life of someone's animal must make restitution—life for life. Anyone who injures their neighbor is to be injured in the same manner: fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth. The one who has inflicted the injury must suffer the same injury. Whoever kills an animal must make restitution, but whoever kills a human being is to be put to death. You are to have the same law for the foreigner and the native-born. I am the LORD your God.'"

Then Moses spoke to the Israelites, and they took the blasphemer outside the camp and stoned him. The Israelites did as the LORD commanded Moses.

The LORD spoke to Moses at Mount Sinai, saying: "Speak to the Israelites and say to them: 'When you enter the land I am going to give you, the land itself must observe a sabbath to the LORD. For six years sow your fields, and for six years prune your vineyards and gather their crops. But in the seventh year, the land is to have a year of sabbath rest, a sabbath to the LORD. Do not sow your fields or prune your vineyards. Do not reap what grows of itself or harvest the grapes of your untended vines. The land is to have a year of rest. Whatever the land yields during the sabbath year will be food for you—for yourself, your male and female servants, the hired worker and temporary resident who live among you, as well as for your livestock and the wild animals in your land. Whatever the land produces may be eaten.

Count off seven sabbath years—seven times seven years—so that the seven sabbath years amount to a period of forty-nine years. Then have the trumpet sounded everywhere on the tenth day of the seventh month; on the Day of Atonement sound the trumpet throughout your land. Consecrate the fiftieth year and proclaim liberty throughout the land to all its inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee for you; each of you is to return to your family property and to your own clan. The fiftieth year shall be a jubilee for you; do not sow and do not reap what grows of itself or harvest the untended vines. For it is a jubilee and is to be holy for you; eat only what is taken directly from the fields.

In this Year of Jubilee everyone is to return to their own property. If you sell land to any of your own people or buy land from them, do not take advantage of each other. You are to buy from your own people on the basis of the number of years since the Jubilee. And they are to sell to you on the basis of the number of years left for harvesting crops. When the years are many, you are to increase the price, and when the years are few, you are to decrease the price, because what is really being sold to you is the number of crops. Do not take advantage of each other, but fear your God. I am the LORD your God.

Follow my decrees and be careful to obey my laws, and you will live safely in the land. Then the land will yield its fruit, and you will eat your fill and live there in safety. You may ask, "What will we eat in the seventh year if we do not plant or harvest our crops?" I will send you such a blessing in the sixth year that the land will yield enough for three years. While you plant during the eighth year, you will eat from the old crop and will continue to eat from it until the harvest of the ninth year comes in.

The land must not be sold permanently because the land is mine and you reside in my land as foreigners and strangers. Throughout the land that you hold as a possession, you must provide for the redemption of the land.

If one of your fellow Israelites becomes poor and sells some of their property, their nearest relative is to come and redeem what they have sold.If a man has no one to redeem his property and later becomes wealthy enough to buy it back, he should calculate the years since it was sold and repay the excess to the buyer, then reclaim his property. If he cannot afford to buy it back, the property remains with the buyer until the Year of Jubilee, when it will be returned to him.

If someone sells a house in a walled city, they have a year to redeem it. If not redeemed within that year, the house permanently belongs to the buyer and does not return in the Jubilee. However, houses in villages without walls are treated like fields and can be redeemed and returned in the Jubilee.

The Levites always have the right to redeem their houses in their cities. If a Levite sells a house, it will be returned in the Jubilee because their houses are their permanent possession among the Israelites. The fields around their cities cannot be sold as they are their permanent possession.

If an Israelite becomes poor and cannot support themselves, help them as you would a foreigner or temporary resident, so they can continue to live among you. Do not charge them interest or profit from their food. Remember, I am the LORD your God who brought you out of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan and to be your God.

If an Israelite becomes poor and sells themselves to you, do not treat them as slaves. They should be treated as hired workers or temporary residents and serve you until the Year of Jubilee. Then they and their children are to be released and return to their own family and property. They are my servants, whom I brought out of Egypt, and must not be sold as slaves. Do not rule over them harshly, but fear your God.

You may buy male and female slaves from the surrounding nations. You can also buy slaves from the foreigners living among you and their families born in your land. They will become your property and can be inherited by your children as permanent possessions. However, do not rule over your fellow Israelites harshly.

If a foreigner living among you becomes wealthy and an Israelite becomes poor and sells themselves to the foreigner or a member of their family, they retain the right to be redeemed. A relative may redeem them, or if they prosper, they may redeem themselves. The price of their redemption is based on the number of years until the Jubilee, calculated as if they were a hired worker. If many years remain, they must repay a larger amount; if few years remain, they repay a smaller amount. They are to be treated as hired workers and not ruled over harshly. If not redeemed, they and their children are to be released in the Year of Jubilee. The Israelites are my servants, whom I brought out of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.

Do not make idols or set up images or sacred stones to bow down to, for I am the LORD your God. Observe my Sabbaths and have reverence for my sanctuary. If you follow my decrees and obey my commands, I will send rain in its season, and the land will yield its crops and the trees their fruit. Your threshing will continue until grape harvest, and the grape harvest will continue until planting, and you will eat all the food you want and live in safety in your land.

If you do not listen to me and carry out all these commands, if you reject my decrees and abhor my laws, breaking my covenant, I will bring upon you sudden terror, wasting diseases, and fever that will destroy your sight and drain your life. You will plant seed in vain because your enemies will eat it. I will set my face against you so that you will be defeated by your enemies; those who hate you will rule over you, and you will flee even when no one is pursuing you.

If after all this you do not listen to me, I will punish you for your sins seven times over. I will break your stubborn pride and make the sky above you like iron and the ground beneath you like bronze. Your strength will be spent in vain because your soil will not yield its crops, nor will the trees of your land yield their fruit.

If you remain hostile toward me and refuse to listen, I will multiply your afflictions seven times over, as your sins deserve. I will send wild animals against you, and they will rob you of your children, destroy your cattle, and make you so few in number that your roads will be deserted.

If in spite of these things you do not accept my correction but continue to be hostile toward me, I will be hostile toward you and will afflict you for your sins seven times over. I will bring the sword upon you to avenge the breaking of the covenant. When you withdraw into your cities, I will send a plague among you, and you will be given into enemy hands. When I cut off your supply of bread, ten women will bake your bread in one oven and dole out the bread by weight. You will eat, but you will not be satisfied.

If in spite of this you still do not listen to me but continue to be hostile toward me, then in my anger I will be hostile toward you, and I myself will punish you for your sins seven times over. You will eat the flesh of your sons and the flesh of your daughters. I will destroy your high places, cut down your incense altars, and pile your dead bodies on the lifeless forms of your idols, and I will abhor you. I will turn your cities into ruins and lay waste your sanctuaries, and I will take no delight in the pleasing aroma of your offerings. I will lay waste the land so that your enemies who live there will be appalled. I will scatter you among the nations and will draw out my sword and pursue you. Your land will be laid waste, and your cities will lie in ruins. Then the land will enjoy its sabbath years all the time that it lies desolate and you are in the country of your enemies; the land will rest and enjoy its sabbaths. All the time that it lies desolate, the land will have the rest it did not have during the sabbaths you lived in it.

As for those of you who are left, I will make their hearts so fearful in the lands of their enemies that the sound of a windblown leaf will put them to flight. They will run as though fleeing from the sword, and they will fall even though no one is pursuing them. They will stumble over one another as though fleeing from the sword, even though no one is pursuing them. So you will not be able to stand before your enemies.If you continue to disobey me, you will perish among the nations, and your enemies' land will consume you. Those who survive will waste away because of their sins and the sins of their ancestors. But if they confess their sins and the sins of their ancestors, acknowledging their betrayal and opposition to me, I will also oppose them and bring them into their enemies' land. If their stubborn hearts are humbled and they accept their punishment, I will remember my covenant with Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham, and I will remember the land. The land will be deserted and enjoy its sabbaths while it lies desolate without them, and they will pay for their sins because they rejected my laws and despised my decrees.

Despite all this, when they are in their enemies' land, I will not reject or despise them to the point of destroying them completely and breaking my covenant with them, for I am the LORD their God. For their sake, I will remember the covenant with their ancestors, whom I brought out of Egypt in the sight of the nations to be their God. I am the LORD.

These are the decrees, laws, and regulations that the LORD established between himself and the Israelites through Moses on Mount Sinai.

The LORD said to Moses, "Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When someone makes a special vow to dedicate persons to the LORD by giving equivalent values, set the value of a male between the ages of twenty and sixty at fifty shekels of silver, according to the sanctuary shekel. For a female, set the value at thirty shekels. For a person between the ages of five and twenty, set the value at twenty shekels for a male and ten shekels for a female. For a person between one month and five years, set the value at five shekels of silver for a male and three shekels of silver for a female. For a person sixty years old or more, set the value at fifteen shekels for a male and ten shekels for a female. If anyone making the vow is too poor to pay the specified amount, they are to present the person to the priest, who will set the value according to what the person making the vow can afford.

If what they vowed is an animal that is acceptable as an offering to the LORD, such an animal given to the LORD becomes holy. They must not exchange it or substitute a good one for a bad one or a bad one for a good one; if they should substitute one animal for another, both it and the substitute become holy. If what they vowed is a ceremonially unclean animal—one that is not acceptable as an offering to the LORD—the animal must be presented to the priest, who will judge its quality as good or bad. Whatever value the priest then sets, that is what it will be. If the owner wishes to redeem the animal, a fifth must be added to its value.

If anyone dedicates their house as something holy to the LORD, the priest will judge its quality as good or bad. Whatever value the priest then sets, so it will remain. If the one who dedicates their house wishes to redeem it, they must add a fifth to its value, and the house will again become theirs.

If anyone dedicates to the LORD part of their family land, its value is to be set according to the amount of seed required for it—fifty shekels of silver to a homer of barley seed. If they dedicate a field during the Year of Jubilee, the value that has been set remains. But if they dedicate a field after the Jubilee, the priest will determine the value according to the number of years that remain until the next Year of Jubilee, and its set value will be reduced. If the one who dedicates the field wishes to redeem it, they must add a fifth to its value, and the field will again become theirs. If, however, they do not redeem the field, or if they have sold it to someone else, it can never be redeemed. When the field is released in the Jubilee, it will become holy, like a field devoted to the LORD; it will become priestly property.

No one may dedicate the firstborn of an animal, since the firstborn already belongs to the LORD; whether an ox or a sheep, it is the LORD's. If it is one of the unclean animals, they may buy it back at its set value, adding a fifth of the value to it. If they do not redeem it, it is to be sold at its set value.

Every tithe of the land, whether grain from the soil or fruit from the trees, belongs to the LORD; it is holy to the LORD. Whoever would redeem any of their tithe must add a fifth of the value to it. Every tithe of the herd and flock—every tenth animal that passes under the shepherd's rod—will be holy to the LORD. No one may pick out the good from the bad or make any substitution. If anyone does make a substitution, both the animal and its substitute become holy and cannot be redeemed."

These are the commands the LORD gave Moses at Mount Sinai for the Israelites.Chapter and Verse B 1:20 - The descendants of Reuben, Israel's firstborn, were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:21 The total number of men from the tribe of Reuben was 46,500.

1:22 - The descendants of Simeon were also counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:23 The total number of men from the tribe of Simeon was 59,300.

1:24 - The descendants of Gad were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:25 The total number of men from the tribe of Gad was 45,650.

1:26 - The descendants of Judah were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:27 The total number of men from the tribe of Judah was 74,600.

1:28 - The descendants of Issachar were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:29 The total number of men from the tribe of Issachar was 54,400.

1:30 - The descendants of Zebulun were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:31 The total number of men from the tribe of Zebulun was 57,400.

1:32 - The descendants of Joseph, specifically from the tribe of Ephraim, were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:33 The total number of men from the tribe of Ephraim was 40,500.

1:34 - The descendants of Manasseh were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:35 The total number of men from the tribe of Manasseh was 32,200.

1:36 - The descendants of Benjamin were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:37 The total number of men from the tribe of Benjamin was 35,400.

1:38 - The descendants of Dan were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:39 The total number of men from the tribe of Dan was 62,700.

1:40 - The descendants of Asher were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:41 The total number of men from the tribe of Asher was 41,500.

1:42 - The descendants of Naphtali were counted by their families and households. Every male aged twenty and above who could serve in the army was listed. 1:43 The total number of men from the tribe of Naphtali was 53,400.

B 2:1 - The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2:2 "The Israelites are to camp by their divisions, each man under his standard with the banners of his family. They are to camp around the tent of meeting but at some distance.

2:3 - On the east side, toward the sunrise, the divisions of the camp of Judah are to encamp under their standard. The leader of the people of Judah is Nahshon son of Amminadab. 2:4 His division numbers 74,600.

2:5 - The tribe of Issachar will camp next to them. The leader of the people of Issachar is Nethanel son of Zuar. 2:6 His division numbers 54,400.

2:7 - The tribe of Zebulun will be next. The leader of the people of Zebulun is Eliab son of Helon. 2:8 His division numbers 57,400.

2:9 - All the men assigned to the camp of Judah, according to their divisions, number 186,400. They will set out first.

2:10 - On the south side will be the divisions of the camp of Reuben under their standard. The leader of the people of Reuben is Elizur son of Shedeur. 2:11 His division numbers 46,500.

2:12 - The tribe of Simeon will camp next to them. The leader of the people of Simeon is Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai. 2:13 His division numbers 59,300.

2:14 - The tribe of Gad will be next. The leader of the people of Gad is Eliasaph son of Deuel. 2:15 His division numbers 45,650.

2:16 - All the men assigned to the camp of Reuben, according to their divisions, number 151,450. They will set out second.

2:17 - Then the tent of meeting and the camp of the Levites will set out in the middle of the camps. They will set out in the same order as they encamp, each in their own place under their standard.

2:18 - On the west side will be the divisions of the camp of Ephraim under their standard. The leader of the people of Ephraim is Elishama son of Ammihud. 2:19 His division numbers 40,500.

2:20 - The tribe of Manasseh will be next to them. The leader of the people of Manasseh is Gamaliel son of Pedahzur. 2:21 His division numbers 32,200.

2:22 - The tribe of Benjamin will be next. The leader of the people of Benjamin is Abidan son of Gideoni. 2:23 His division numbers 35,400.

2:24 - All the men assigned to the camp of Ephraim, according to their divisions, number 108,100. They will set out third.

2:25 - On the north side will be the divisions of the camp of Dan under their standard. The leader of the people of Dan is Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai. 2:26 His division numbers 62,700.

2:27 - The tribe of Asher will camp next to them. The leader of the people of Asher is Pagiel son of Ochran. 2:28 His division numbers 41,500.

2:29 - The tribe of Naphtali will be next. The leader of the people of Naphtali is Ahira son of Enan. 2:30 His division numbers 53,400.

2:31 - All the men assigned to the camp of Dan number 157,600. They will set out last, under their standards.

C 1:44 - These were the men counted by Moses and Aaron, along with the leaders of Israel, twelve men, each representing his family.

1:45 - All the Israelites twenty years old or more who were able to serve in Israel's army were counted according to their families.

1:46 - The total number was 603,550.

1:47 - The Levites, however, were not counted along with the other Israelites.

C 2:32 - These are the men counted by Moses and Aaron, along with the leaders of Israel, twelve men, each representing his family.

2:33 - The Levites were not counted among the other Israelites, as the LORD commanded Moses.

2:34 - So the Israelites did everything the LORD commanded Moses; that is the way they encamped under their standards, and that is the way they set out, each with his clan and family.

NUMBERS UNIT I (1:1 - 4:49)

A 3:1 - These are the generations of Aaron and Moses at the time the LORD spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai.

3:2 - These are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the firstborn, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

3:3 - These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests, who were ordained to serve as priests.

3:4 - Nadab and Abihu, however, died before the LORD when they made an unauthorized offering before Him in the Desert of Sinai. They had no sons, so Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests during the lifetime of their father Aaron.

A 3:14 - The LORD said to Moses in the Desert of Sinai, 3:15 "Count the Levites by their families and clans. Count every male a month old or more." 3:16 So Moses counted them, as he was commanded by the word of the LORD.The LORD commanded Moses to count the Levites by their families and clans. These are the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. The sons of Gershon were Libni and Shimei. The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites.

The LORD told Moses to bring the tribe of Levi to assist Aaron the priest. They were to take care of the tabernacle and its furnishings, and serve the community. The Levites were given to Aaron and his sons to help with their priestly duties. Any unauthorized person who approached the sanctuary would be put to death.

The families of Gershon, including the Libnites and Shimeites, numbered 7,500 males from a month old and up. They camped west of the tabernacle, with Eliasaph son of Lael as their leader. Their duties included caring for the tabernacle's coverings, curtains, and cords.

The families of Kohath, including the Amramites, Izharites, Hebronites, and Uzzielites, numbered 8,600 males from a month old and up. They camped south of the tabernacle, with Elizaphan son of Uzziel as their leader. Their duties included caring for the ark, table, lampstand, altars, and other sacred items. Eleazar, son of Aaron, oversaw them.

The families of Merari, including the Mahlites and Mushites, numbered 6,200 males from a month old and up. They camped north of the tabernacle, with Zuriel son of Abihail as their leader. Their duties included caring for the tabernacle's frames, bars, pillars, and bases.

Moses, Aaron, and his sons camped east of the tabernacle, guarding the sanctuary. Any unauthorized person who approached would be put to death. The total number of Levites counted was 22,000 males from a month old and up.

The LORD told Moses to count all the firstborn males of Israel from a month old and up. The total number was 22,273. The LORD took the Levites in place of the firstborn of Israel and their cattle in place of the firstborn cattle. Moses collected five shekels for each of the 273 firstborn Israelites who exceeded the number of Levites and gave the money to Aaron and his sons as commanded by the LORD.

The LORD instructed Moses and Aaron to count the Kohathites from thirty to fifty years old, those who would serve in the tent of meeting. Their duties included caring for the most holy items. Aaron and his sons were to cover these items before the Kohathites transported them, ensuring they did not touch or see the holy things, lest they die. The total number of Kohathites counted for service was 2,750.The families of the Kohathites who served in the tent of meeting were counted by Moses and Aaron as commanded by the LORD. The LORD then instructed Moses to count the sons of Gershon by their families, from thirty to fifty years old, those who would serve in the tent of meeting. The Gershonites were responsible for carrying the curtains of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, its covering, the sealskin covering, the screen for the door, the hangings of the court, the screen for the gate, and all related cords and instruments. Their service was directed by Aaron and his sons, and they were under the supervision of Ithamar, son of Aaron. The total number of Gershonites counted for service was 2,630.

Next, the LORD instructed Moses to count the sons of Merari by their families, from thirty to fifty years old, those who would serve in the tent of meeting. The Merarites were responsible for the boards, bars, pillars, sockets, and all related items of the tabernacle. Their service was also under the supervision of Ithamar, son of Aaron. The total number of Merarites counted for service was 3,200.

In total, Moses, Aaron, and the leaders of Israel counted 8,580 Levites from thirty to fifty years old, who were assigned to their specific duties and burdens in the tent of meeting as commanded by the LORD.

The LORD then instructed Moses to command the Israelites to remove from the camp anyone with a skin disease, a discharge, or who was unclean due to contact with the dead, to prevent defiling the camp where the LORD dwells. The Israelites obeyed and removed the unclean individuals from the camp.

The LORD also instructed Moses to tell the Israelites that if a man or woman commits a sin against another person, they must confess their sin, make full restitution, and add a fifth of the value to it. If the wronged person has no relative to receive the restitution, it should be given to the LORD for the priest, along with a ram for atonement.

Additionally, the LORD provided instructions for dealing with a wife suspected of unfaithfulness. The husband would bring his wife to the priest with an offering. The priest would prepare a mixture of holy water and tabernacle dust, and the woman would drink it after taking an oath. If she was guilty, the water would cause her belly to swell and her thigh to waste away, making her a curse among her people. If she was innocent, she would be unharmed and able to conceive children.

Finally, the LORD spoke to Moses about the Nazirite vow. A man or woman who takes this vow must abstain from wine, strong drink, vinegar, grape products, and must not cut their hair for the duration of the vow. They must also avoid contact with dead bodies to remain consecrated to the LORD.A Nazirite must not defile himself by coming near a dead body, even if it is his father, mother, brother, or sister. His dedication to God is symbolized by his uncut hair. If someone dies suddenly beside him, he must shave his head on the seventh day of his cleansing. On the eighth day, he must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. The priest will offer one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to atone for the defilement. The Nazirite will then rededicate his head and bring a year-old male lamb as a guilt offering. The previous days of his vow are void because his consecration was defiled.

When a Nazirite completes his vow, he must bring his offerings to the entrance of the tent of meeting: a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering, a year-old female lamb for a sin offering, a ram for a peace offering, a basket of unleavened bread, cakes mixed with oil, unleavened wafers spread with oil, and their grain and drink offerings. The priest will present these offerings to the LORD. The Nazirite will then shave his consecrated head at the entrance of the tent of meeting and place the hair on the fire under the peace offering. The priest will take the boiled shoulder of the ram, one unleavened cake, and one unleavened wafer, and place them in the Nazirite's hands after he has shaved his head. The priest will then wave them as a wave offering before the LORD. This is holy for the priest, along with the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the heave offering. After this, the Nazirite may drink wine. This is the law of the Nazirite who makes a vow and brings his offerings to the LORD.

The LORD spoke to Moses, instructing him to tell Aaron and his sons to bless the Israelites with these words: "The LORD bless you and keep you; the LORD make His face shine upon you and be gracious to you; the LORD lift up His countenance upon you and give you peace." By doing this, they will put God's name on the Israelites, and He will bless them.

On the day Moses finished setting up the tabernacle, he anointed and consecrated it and all its furnishings, including the altar and its utensils. The leaders of Israel, the heads of their ancestral houses, brought their offerings: six covered wagons and twelve oxen, a wagon for every two leaders and an ox for each. They presented these before the tabernacle. The LORD instructed Moses to accept these offerings and distribute them to the Levites according to their service. Moses gave two wagons and four oxen to the Gershonites, and four wagons and eight oxen to the Merarites, under the supervision of Ithamar, son of Aaron. The Kohathites received none because they carried the holy items on their shoulders.

The leaders brought their offerings for the dedication of the altar when it was anointed. Each leader presented his offering on a specific day. On the first day, Nahshon, son of Amminadab, from the tribe of Judah, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the second day, Nethanel, son of Zuar, leader of Issachar, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the third day, Eliab, son of Helon, leader of Zebulun, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the fourth day, Elizur, son of Shedeur, leader of Reuben, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the fifth day, Shelumiel, son of Zurishaddai, leader of Simeon, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the sixth day, Eliasaph, son of Deuel, leader of Gad, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the seventh day, Elishama, son of Ammihud, leader of Ephraim, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the eighth day, Gamaliel, son of Pedahzur, leader of Manasseh, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.On the ninth day, Abidan, son of Gideoni, leader of the tribe of Benjamin, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the tenth day, Ahiezer, son of Ammishaddai, leader of the tribe of Dan, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the eleventh day, Pagiel, son of Ochran, leader of the tribe of Asher, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

On the twelfth day, Ahira, son of Enan, leader of the tribe of Naphtali, brought his offering: a silver dish weighing 130 shekels, a silver basin weighing 70 shekels, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; a golden pan weighing 10 shekels filled with incense; a young bull, a ram, and a year-old male lamb for a burnt offering; a male goat for a sin offering; and for the peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five year-old male lambs.

These were the offerings for the dedication of the altar when it was anointed, brought by the leaders of Israel: twelve silver dishes, twelve silver basins, and twelve golden pans. Each silver dish weighed 130 shekels, and each basin weighed 70 shekels, making a total of 2,400 shekels of silver. The twelve golden pans, filled with incense, each weighed 10 shekels, totaling 120 shekels of gold. The offerings included twelve young bulls, twelve rams, and twelve year-old male lambs for burnt offerings, along with their grain offerings. For sin offerings, there were twelve male goats. For peace offerings, there were twenty-four oxen, sixty rams, sixty male goats, and sixty year-old male lambs. This was the dedication offering for the altar after it was anointed.

When Moses entered the tent of meeting to speak with the LORD, he heard the voice speaking to him from above the cover of the ark of the testimony, between the two cherubim, and the LORD spoke to him.

The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, "Speak to Aaron and tell him: When you set up the lamps, the seven lamps shall light the area in front of the lampstand." Aaron did so, setting up the lamps to light the area in front of the lampstand, as the LORD commanded Moses.

The LORD also instructed Moses to take the Levites from among the Israelites and purify them. To purify them, sprinkle them with the water of purification, have them shave their entire bodies, wash their clothes, and cleanse themselves. Then, have them take a young bull with its grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, and another young bull for a sin offering. Present the Levites before the tent of meeting and assemble the whole congregation of Israel. Present the Levites before the LORD, and the Israelites shall lay their hands on the Levites. Aaron shall offer the Levites before the LORD as a wave offering from the Israelites, so they may perform the service of the LORD. The Levites shall lay their hands on the heads of the bulls, and offer one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering to make atonement for the Levites. Set the Levites before Aaron and his sons and offer them as a wave offering to the LORD. This will separate the Levites from the Israelites, and the Levites will belong to the LORD. After this, the Levites will go in to perform the service of the tent of meeting, having been purified and offered as a wave offering.

The LORD said, "The Levites are wholly given to Me from among the Israelites. Instead of all the firstborn of the Israelites, I have taken the Levites for Myself. All the firstborn in Israel, both human and animal, are Mine. On the day I struck down all the firstborn in Egypt, I consecrated them for Myself. I have taken the Levites in place of all the firstborn of the Israelites. I have given the Levites to Aaron and his sons from among the Israelites to perform the service of the tent of meeting and to make atonement for the Israelites, so no plague will strike the Israelites when they approach the sanctuary."

Moses, Aaron, and the whole congregation of Israel did as the LORD commanded concerning the Levites. The Levites purified themselves, washed their clothes, and Aaron offered them as a wave offering before the LORD and made atonement for them. After that, the Levites went in to perform their service in the tent of meeting before Aaron and his sons, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

The LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in the first month of the second year after they had come out of Egypt, saying, "Let the Israelites keep the Passover at its appointed time. On the fourteenth day of this month, at twilight, they shall keep it according to all its statutes and ordinances." Moses instructed the Israelites to keep the Passover, and they did so in the wilderness of Sinai on the fourteenth day of the first month, as the LORD commanded Moses.

The LORD also spoke to Moses about the Levites' service: "From twenty-five years old and upward, they shall enter to perform the service in the tent of meeting. At the age of fifty, they shall retire from the service and work no more, but they may assist their brothers in the tent of meeting to keep the charge, but they shall not do the work. This is how you shall manage the Levites' duties."

Some men were unclean because of contact with a dead body and could not keep the Passover on that day. They approached Moses and Aaron and asked why they should be kept from presenting the LORD's offering at its appointed time. Moses told them to wait while he listened to what the LORD would command concerning them. The LORD instructed Moses that if anyone is unclean due to a dead body or is on a journey, they may still keep the Passover in the second month on the fourteenth day at twilight. They shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs."Do not leave any of it until morning, and do not break any of its bones. Follow all the Passover regulations. 

If someone is clean and not on a journey but fails to observe the Passover, they must be cut off from their people because they did not present the LORD's offering at the appointed time. They will bear their sin. 

If a foreigner living among you wants to celebrate the Passover to the LORD, they must do so according to its regulations and rules. The same law applies to both the foreigner and the native-born.

On the day the tabernacle was set up, a cloud covered it, and at night it looked like fire. This continued: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire by night. Whenever the cloud lifted from the tent, the Israelites would set out, and wherever the cloud settled, the Israelites would camp. 

At the LORD's command, the Israelites set out, and at His command, they camped. As long as the cloud stayed over the tabernacle, they remained in camp. When the cloud stayed over the tabernacle for a long time, the Israelites obeyed the LORD's order and did not set out. Sometimes the cloud was over the tabernacle for only a few days; at the LORD's command, they would camp, and at His command, they would set out. Sometimes the cloud stayed only from evening until morning, and when it lifted in the morning, they set out. Whether by day or by night, whenever the cloud lifted, they set out. Whether it was two days, a month, or a year that the cloud remained over the tabernacle, the Israelites stayed in camp and did not set out; but when it lifted, they set out. At the LORD's command, they camped, and at the LORD's command, they set out. They obeyed the LORD's order, given through Moses.

In the second year, on the twentieth day of the second month, the cloud lifted from above the tabernacle of the testimony. The Israelites set out from the Desert of Sinai and traveled from place to place until the cloud came to rest in the Desert of Paran. They set out, this first time, at the LORD's command through Moses.

Moses said to Hobab, son of Reuel the Midianite, Moses' father-in-law, "We are setting out for the place the LORD promised to give us. Come with us, and we will treat you well, for the LORD has promised good things to Israel." But Hobab replied, "I will not go; I am going back to my own land and my own people." Moses said, "Please do not leave us. You know where we should camp in the desert, and you can be our eyes. If you come with us, we will share with you whatever good things the LORD gives us."

The LORD said to Moses, "Make two trumpets of hammered silver, and use them for calling the community together and for having the camps set out. When both are sounded, the whole community is to assemble before you at the entrance to the tent of meeting. If only one is sounded, the leaders—the heads of the clans of Israel—are to assemble before you. When a trumpet blast is sounded, the tribes camping on the east are to set out. At the sound of a second blast, the camps on the south are to set out. The blast will be the signal for setting out. To gather the assembly, blow the trumpets, but not with the signal for setting out. The sons of Aaron, the priests, are to blow the trumpets. This is to be a lasting ordinance for you and the generations to come. When you go into battle in your own land against an enemy who is oppressing you, sound a blast on the trumpets. Then you will be remembered by the LORD your God and rescued from your enemies. Also, at your times of rejoicing—your appointed festivals and New Moon feasts—you are to sound the trumpets over your burnt offerings and fellowship offerings, and they will be a memorial for you before your God. I am the LORD your God."

The Israelites set out from the mountain of the LORD and traveled for three days. The ark of the covenant of the LORD went before them during those three days to find them a place to rest. The cloud of the LORD was over them by day when they set out from the camp. Whenever the ark set out, Moses said, "Rise up, LORD! May your enemies be scattered; may your foes flee before you." Whenever it came to rest, he said, "Return, LORD, to the countless thousands of Israel."

The people complained about their hardships in the hearing of the LORD, and when He heard them, His anger was aroused. Then fire from the LORD burned among them and consumed some of the outskirts of the camp. When the people cried out to Moses, he prayed to the LORD, and the fire died down. So that place was called Taberah, because fire from the LORD had burned among them.

The LORD said to Moses, "Bring me seventy of Israel's elders who are known to you as leaders and officials among the people. Have them come to the tent of meeting, that they may stand there with you. I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take some of the power of the Spirit that is on you and put it on them. They will share the burden of the people with you so that you will not have to carry it alone."

Moses went out and told the people what the LORD had said. He brought together seventy of their elders and had them stand around the tent. Then the LORD came down in the cloud and spoke with him, and He took some of the power of the Spirit that was on him and put it on the seventy elders. When the Spirit rested on them, they prophesied—but did not do so again. However, two men, whose names were Eldad and Medad, had remained in the camp. They were listed among the elders but did not go out to the tent. Yet the Spirit also rested on them, and they prophesied in the camp. A young man ran and told Moses, "Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp." Joshua son of Nun, who had been Moses' aide since youth, spoke up and said, "Moses, my lord, stop them!" But Moses replied, "Are you jealous for my sake? I wish that all the LORD's people were prophets and that the LORD would put His Spirit on them!"

The mixed multitude among them began to crave other food, and again the Israelites started wailing and said, "If only we had meat to eat! We remember the fish we ate in Egypt at no cost—also the cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions, and garlic. But now we have lost our appetite; we never see anything but this manna!" The manna was like coriander seed and looked like resin. The people went around gathering it, and then ground it in a hand mill or crushed it in a mortar. They cooked it in a pot or made it into loaves. It tasted like something made with olive oil."The manna tasted like cakes baked with oil. When the dew fell on the camp at night, the manna fell with it. Moses heard the people weeping, each family at the entrance of their tent, and the LORD's anger was greatly kindled. Moses was also displeased.

The LORD instructed Moses to tell the people to prepare themselves, for they would eat meat the next day. They had complained, longing for the food they had in Egypt, so the LORD would give them meat to eat—not just for a day or two, but for a whole month, until they were sick of it. This was because they had rejected the LORD and complained about leaving Egypt.

Moses and the elders of Israel returned to the camp. A wind from the LORD brought quails from the sea, which fell around the camp, about a day's journey in every direction, and piled up about two cubits deep. The people gathered the quails all day, night, and the next day, collecting large amounts. They spread them out around the camp.

Moses questioned the LORD, feeling overwhelmed by the burden of leading the people. He asked why he had to carry the responsibility alone and expressed his inability to provide meat for everyone. The LORD reassured Moses, asking if His power was limited and promising that His word would come to pass.

While the people were still eating the meat, the LORD's anger was kindled, and He struck them with a severe plague. The place was named Kibroth-hattaavah, where they buried those who craved other food. From there, the people traveled to Hazeroth and stayed there.

Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman he had married. They questioned if the LORD had only spoken through Moses and not also through them. The LORD heard this and summoned Moses, Aaron, and Miriam to the tent of meeting. He came down in a pillar of cloud and called Aaron and Miriam forward. The LORD explained that He spoke to prophets through visions and dreams, but with Moses, He spoke face to face. The LORD's anger was kindled against them, and He departed. When the cloud lifted, Miriam was leprous, white as snow. Aaron pleaded with Moses not to hold their sin against them. Moses cried out to the LORD to heal her. The LORD instructed that Miriam be confined outside the camp for seven days, after which she was brought back, and the people continued their journey to the wilderness of Paran.

The LORD instructed Moses to send men to spy out the land of Canaan, one from each tribe. Moses sent them from the wilderness of Paran, and they explored the land from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob. They saw the descendants of Anak in Hebron and brought back a cluster of grapes, pomegranates, and figs from the valley of Eshcol. After forty days, they returned and reported to Moses, Aaron, and the congregation, showing them the fruit of the land. They confirmed that the land flowed with milk and honey but also reported that the inhabitants were strong and the cities fortified. Caleb urged the people to go up and possess the land, but the other spies spread a negative report, saying the land devoured its inhabitants and that they felt like grasshoppers compared to the giants there.

The congregation wept and murmured against Moses and Aaron, expressing a desire to return to Egypt. They questioned why the LORD had brought them to this land to die by the sword and suggested appointing a leader to take them back to Egypt.Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before the entire assembly of the Israelites. Joshua, son of Nun, and Caleb, son of Jephunneh, who were among those who scouted the land, tore their clothes in distress. They addressed the congregation, saying, "The land we explored is very good. If the LORD is pleased with us, He will bring us into this land, a land flowing with milk and honey, and give it to us. Do not rebel against the LORD or fear the people of the land, for we will devour them. Their protection is gone, but the LORD is with us. Do not be afraid of them."

However, the whole assembly talked about stoning them. Then the glory of the LORD appeared at the tent of meeting to all the Israelites. The LORD said to Moses, "How long will these people treat me with contempt? How long will they refuse to believe in me, despite all the signs I have performed among them? I will strike them down with a plague and destroy them, but I will make you into a nation greater and stronger than they."

Moses replied to the LORD, "Then the Egyptians will hear about it! By your power, you brought these people up from among them. They will tell the inhabitants of this land about it. They have already heard that you, LORD, are with these people and that you, LORD, have been seen face to face, that your cloud stays over them, and that you go before them in a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night. If you put all these people to death, leaving none alive, the nations who have heard this report about you will say, 'The LORD was not able to bring these people into the land he promised them on oath, so he slaughtered them in the wilderness.'

"Now may the Lord's strength be displayed, just as you have declared: 'The LORD is slow to anger, abounding in love and forgiving sin and rebellion. Yet he does not leave the guilty unpunished; he punishes the children for the sin of the parents to the third and fourth generation.' In accordance with your great love, forgive the sin of these people, just as you have pardoned them from the time they left Egypt until now."

The LORD replied, "I have forgiven them, as you asked. Nevertheless, as surely as I live and as surely as the glory of the LORD fills the whole earth, not one of those who saw my glory and the signs I performed in Egypt and in the wilderness but who disobeyed me and tested me ten times—not one of them will ever see the land I promised on oath to their ancestors. No one who has treated me with contempt will ever see it. But because my servant Caleb has a different spirit and follows me wholeheartedly, I will bring him into the land he went to, and his descendants will inherit it. Since the Amalekites and the Canaanites are living in the valleys, turn back tomorrow and set out toward the desert along the route to the Red Sea."

The LORD said to Moses and Aaron, "How long will this wicked community grumble against me? I have heard the complaints of these grumbling Israelites. So tell them, 'As surely as I live, declares the LORD, I will do to you the very thing I heard you say: In this wilderness, your bodies will fall—every one of you twenty years old or more who was counted in the census and who has grumbled against me. Not one of you will enter the land I swore with uplifted hand to make your home, except Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun. As for your children that you said would be taken as plunder, I will bring them in to enjoy the land you have rejected. But as for you, your bodies will fall in this wilderness. Your children will be shepherds here for forty years, suffering for your unfaithfulness, until the last of your bodies lies in the wilderness. For forty years—one year for each of the forty days you explored the land—you will suffer for your sins and know what it is like to have me against you.' I, the LORD, have spoken, and I will surely do these things to this whole wicked community, which has banded together against me. They will meet their end in this wilderness; here they will die."

So the men Moses had sent to explore the land, who returned and made the whole community grumble against him by spreading a bad report about it—these men who were responsible for spreading the bad report about the land were struck down and died of a plague before the LORD. Of the men who went to explore the land, only Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh survived.

When Moses reported this to all the Israelites, they mourned bitterly. Early the next morning, they set out for the highest point in the hill country, saying, "Now we are ready to go up to the land the LORD promised. Surely we have sinned!"

But Moses said, "Why are you disobeying the LORD's command? This will not succeed! Do not go up, because the LORD is not with you. You will be defeated by your enemies, for the Amalekites and the Canaanites will face you there. Because you have turned away from the LORD, he will not be with you, and you will fall by the sword."

Nevertheless, in their presumption, they went up toward the highest point in the hill country, though neither Moses nor the ark of the LORD's covenant moved from the camp. Then the Amalekites and the Canaanites who lived in that hill country came down and attacked them and beat them down all the way to Hormah.

The LORD said to Moses, "Speak to the Israelites and say to them: 'After you enter the land I am giving you as a home and you present to the LORD food offerings from the herd or the flock, as an aroma pleasing to the LORD—whether burnt offerings or sacrifices, for special vows or freewill offerings or festival offerings—then the person who brings an offering shall present to the LORD a grain offering of a tenth of an ephah of the finest flour mixed with a quarter of a hin of olive oil. With each lamb for the burnt offering or the sacrifice, prepare a quarter of a hin of wine as a drink offering.

"'With a ram, prepare a grain offering of two-tenths of an ephah of the finest flour mixed with a third of a hin of olive oil, and a third of a hin of wine as a drink offering. Offer it as an aroma pleasing to the LORD.

"'When you prepare a young bull as a burnt offering or sacrifice, for a special vow or a fellowship offering to the LORD, bring with the bull a grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of the finest flour mixed with half a hin of olive oil, and also bring half a hin of wine as a drink offering. This will be a food offering, an aroma pleasing to the LORD. Each bull or ram, each lamb or young goat, is to be prepared in this manner. Do this for each one, for as many as you prepare.

"'Everyone who is native-born must do these things in this way when they present a food offering as an aroma pleasing to the LORD. For the generations to come, whenever a foreigner or anyone else living among you presents a food offering as an aroma pleasing to the LORD, they must do exactly as you do. The community is to have the same rules for you and for the foreigner residing among you; this is a lasting ordinance for the generations to come. You and the foreigner shall be the same before the LORD: The same laws and regulations will apply both to you and to the foreigner residing among you.'"

The LORD said to Moses, "Speak to the Israelites and say to them: 'When you enter the land to which I am taking you and you eat the food of the land, present a portion as an offering to the LORD. Present a loaf from the first of your ground meal and present it as an offering from the threshing floor. Throughout the generations to come, you are to give this offering to the LORD from the first of your ground meal.

"'Now if you as a community unintentionally fail to keep any of these commands the LORD gave Moses—any of the LORD's commands to you through him, from the day the LORD gave them and continuing through the generations to come—and if this is done unintentionally without the community being aware of it, then the whole community is to offer a young bull for a burnt offering as an aroma pleasing to the LORD, along with its prescribed grain offering and drink offering, and a male goat for a sin offering. The priest is to make atonement for the whole Israelite community, and they will be forgiven, for it was not intentional and they have presented to the LORD for their wrong a food offering and a sin offering.If someone sins unintentionally, they must offer a year-old female goat as a sin offering. The priest will make atonement for the person who sinned unintentionally, and they will be forgiven. This applies to both native-born Israelites and foreigners living among them; there is one law for everyone who sins unintentionally. However, anyone who sins defiantly, whether native-born or foreigner, blasphemes the Lord and must be cut off from their people. They have despised the Lord's word and broken His commands; their guilt remains on them.

While the Israelites were in the wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks on the Sabbath. Those who found him brought him to Moses, Aaron, and the whole assembly, and they kept him in custody because it was not clear what should be done to him. The Lord said to Moses, "The man must die. The whole assembly must stone him outside the camp." So the assembly took him outside the camp and stoned him to death, as the Lord commanded Moses.

The Lord said to Moses, "Speak to the Israelites and tell them to make tassels on the corners of their garments throughout the generations and to put a blue cord on each tassel. These tassels will remind you to obey all my commands and not to follow your own heart and eyes, which lead you to unfaithfulness. You will remember to obey all my commands and be holy to your God. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt to be your God. I am the Lord your God."

Korah, son of Izhar, along with Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab, and On, son of Peleth, and 250 Israelite men, leaders of the community, confronted Moses and Aaron. They said, "You have gone too far! The whole community is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is with them. Why do you set yourselves above the Lord's assembly?" When Moses heard this, he fell facedown and said to Korah and his followers, "In the morning, the Lord will show who belongs to Him and who is holy. The one He chooses, He will bring near to Him. You, Korah, and all your followers are to do this: Take censers and put burning coals and incense in them before the Lord tomorrow. The man the Lord chooses will be the holy one. You Levites have gone too far!"

Moses also said to Korah, "Isn't it enough that the God of Israel has separated you from the rest of the Israelite community to bring you near Himself to do the work at the Lord's tabernacle and to stand before the community and minister to them? He has brought you and all your fellow Levites near Himself, but now you are trying to get the priesthood too. It is against the Lord that you and all your followers have banded together. Who is Aaron that you should grumble against him?"

Then Moses summoned Dathan and Abiram, but they said, "We will not come! Isn't it enough that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey to kill us in the wilderness? And now you also want to lord it over us! Moreover, you haven't brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey or given us an inheritance of fields and vineyards. Do you want to treat these men like slaves? No, we will not come!"

Moses became very angry and said to the Lord, "Do not accept their offering. I have not taken so much as a donkey from them, nor have I wronged any of them." Moses said to Korah, "You and all your followers are to appear before the Lord tomorrow—you and they and Aaron. Each man is to take his censer and put incense in it—250 censers in all—and present it before the Lord. You and Aaron are to present your censers also." So each man took his censer, put burning coals and incense in it, and stood with Moses and Aaron at the entrance to the tent of meeting.

The Lord said to Moses, "Tell Eleazar son of Aaron, the priest, to remove the censers from the charred remains and scatter the coals some distance away, for the censers are holy. The censers of the men who sinned at the cost of their lives are to be hammered into sheets to overlay the altar, for they were presented before the Lord and have become holy. Let them be a sign to the Israelites." So Eleazar the priest collected the bronze censers brought by those who had been burned to death, and they were hammered out to overlay the altar as the Lord directed him through Moses. This was to remind the Israelites that no one except a descendant of Aaron should come to burn incense before the Lord, or they would suffer the same fate as Korah and his followers.

The next day, the whole Israelite community grumbled against Moses and Aaron, saying, "You have killed the Lord's people." When the assembly gathered in opposition to Moses and Aaron and turned toward the tent of meeting, suddenly the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared. Moses and Aaron went to the front of the tent of meeting, and the Lord said to Moses, "Get away from this assembly so I can put an end to them at once." And they fell facedown. Then Moses said to Aaron, "Take your censer and put incense in it, along with burning coals from the altar, and hurry to the assembly to make atonement for them. Wrath has come out from the Lord; the plague has started." So Aaron did as Moses said and ran into the midst of the assembly. The plague had already started among the people, but Aaron offered the incense and made atonement for them. He stood between the living and the dead, and the plague stopped. But 14,700 people died from the plague, in addition to those who had died because of Korah. Then Aaron returned to Moses at the entrance to the tent of meeting, and the plague had stopped.

The Lord said to Moses, "Tell the assembly to move away from the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram." Moses got up and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel followed him. He warned the assembly, "Move back from the tents of these wicked men! Do not touch anything belonging to them, or you will be swept away because of all their sins." So they moved away from the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Dathan and Abiram had come out and were standing with their wives, children, and little ones at the entrances to their tents. Then Moses said, "This is how you will know that the Lord has sent me to do all these things and that it was not my idea: If these men die a natural death and suffer the fate of all mankind, then the Lord has not sent me. But if the Lord brings about something totally new, and the earth opens its mouth and swallows them, with everything that belongs to them, and they go down alive into the realm of the dead, then you will know that these men have treated the Lord with contempt."

As soon as he finished saying all this, the ground under them split apart, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them and their households, and all those associated with Korah, together with their possessions. They went down alive into the realm of the dead, with everything they owned; the earth closed over them, and they perished and were gone from the community. At their cries, all the Israelites around them fled, shouting, "The earth is going to swallow us too!" And fire came out from the Lord and consumed the 250 men who were offering the incense.Moses told the Israelites to bring a staff from each of their leaders, representing the twelve tribes. Aaron's name was written on the staff for the tribe of Levi. These staffs were placed in the tent of meeting before the testimony. The next day, Aaron's staff had sprouted, budded, blossomed, and produced almonds. This was a sign to stop the Israelites' complaints against Moses and Aaron.

The Lord instructed Moses to keep Aaron's staff as a reminder to the rebellious Israelites. The people then expressed their fear of perishing if they approached the Lord's tabernacle.

The Lord told Aaron that he and his descendants would bear the responsibility for any offenses related to the sanctuary and priesthood. The Levites were to assist them but were not to approach the holy items or the altar, or they would die. The Levites were given as a gift to help with the service of the tent of meeting.

Aaron and his descendants were given the priesthood as a gift and were responsible for the altar and everything within the veil. They were to receive the holy offerings from the Israelites as their portion, including the best of the oil, wine, grain, and first-ripe fruits. The firstborn of all creatures were also given to them, with the firstborn of humans and unclean animals to be redeemed.

The Levites were to receive a tithe from the Israelites as their inheritance in return for their service. They were to set apart a portion of this tithe as a gift to the Lord, which would be given to Aaron the priest. This portion was to be considered as the increase from the threshing floor and winepress. The Levites and their households could eat it as their reward for their service.

The Lord also commanded Moses and Aaron to instruct the Israelites to bring a red heifer without blemish, which had never been yoked. The heifer was to be slaughtered outside the camp, and its blood sprinkled toward the front of the tent of meeting. The heifer was to be burned completely, and the ashes kept for purification from sin. Anyone who touched a dead body would be unclean for seven days and needed to purify themselves on the third and seventh days to be clean.If someone touches a dead body and doesn't purify themselves, they defile the Lord's tabernacle and must be cut off from Israel. They remain unclean because they haven't been sprinkled with the purification water. 

Here's the law: When someone dies in a tent, everyone who enters the tent and everything inside will be unclean for seven days. Any open container without a lid is also unclean. If someone touches a dead body in an open field, whether killed by a sword, died naturally, or even a human bone or grave, they will be unclean for seven days.

To purify the unclean, take some ashes from the burnt purification offering and mix them with running water in a vessel. A clean person will dip hyssop in the water and sprinkle it on the tent, all the vessels, and the people who were there, as well as anyone who touched a bone, a dead body, or a grave. The clean person will sprinkle the unclean on the third and seventh days, then the unclean person must wash their clothes and bathe in water to be clean by evening.

If someone remains unclean and doesn't purify themselves, they must be cut off from the community because they've defiled the Lord's sanctuary. The purification water wasn't sprinkled on them, so they remain unclean. This rule is permanent. Anyone who sprinkles the purification water must wash their clothes, and anyone who touches the water will be unclean until evening. Anything the unclean person touches will also be unclean, and anyone who touches them will be unclean until evening.

In the first month, the Israelites arrived in the wilderness of Zin and stayed in Kadesh, where Miriam died and was buried. There was no water, so the people gathered against Moses and Aaron, complaining that they wished they had died like their brothers before the Lord. They questioned why they were brought to this barren place with no seeds, figs, vines, pomegranates, or water.

Moses and Aaron went to the entrance of the tent of meeting and fell on their faces. The glory of the Lord appeared, and He instructed Moses to take the rod, gather the assembly, and speak to the rock to bring forth water for the people and their livestock. Moses took the rod as commanded, gathered the assembly, and struck the rock twice with the rod, bringing forth abundant water.

However, the Lord told Moses and Aaron that because they didn't trust Him enough to honor Him before the Israelites, they wouldn't lead the assembly into the promised land. These waters were called Meribah, where the Israelites quarreled with the Lord, and He showed His holiness among them.

Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom, asking for passage through their land, promising not to touch fields, vineyards, or drink well water, but to stay on the king's highway. Edom refused, threatening to come out with the sword. Despite further pleas, Edom denied passage, so Israel turned away.

The Israelites journeyed from Kadesh to Mount Hor, where the Lord told Moses and Aaron that Aaron would die there because of their rebellion at Meribah. Moses was to take Aaron and his son Eleazar up the mountain, transfer Aaron's garments to Eleazar, and Aaron would die there. Moses did as commanded, and Aaron died on the mountain. The Israelites mourned Aaron for thirty days.

The Canaanite king of Arad heard of Israel's approach and fought against them, taking some captives. Israel vowed to the Lord to destroy the Canaanite cities if He delivered them, and the Lord granted their request. The place was named Hormah.

The Israelites continued their journey, becoming impatient and speaking against God and Moses, lamenting their lack of bread and water. The Lord sent fiery serpents, and many Israelites died from their bites. The people confessed their sin and asked Moses to pray for them. The Lord instructed Moses to make a bronze serpent and set it on a pole; anyone bitten who looked at it would live. Moses did so, and those who looked at the bronze serpent were healed.

The Israelites journeyed to various locations, including Oboth, Ije-abarim, the valley of Zered, and the other side of the Arnon, which marked the border between Moab and the Amorites. They sent messengers to Sihon, king of the Amorites, requesting passage through his land, promising not to touch fields, vineyards, or drink well water, but Sihon refused and fought against Israel. Israel defeated Sihon, taking possession of his land and cities, including Heshbon, which Sihon had previously taken from Moab.The leaders of the people dug the well with their scepters and staffs. From the wilderness, they traveled to Mattanah, then to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth. From Bamoth, they went to the valley in the field of Moab, near the top of Pisgah, which overlooks the desert.

Those who speak in parables say: "Come to Heshbon! Let the city of Sihon be built and established! A fire has gone out from Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon; it has devoured Ar of Moab, the lords of the high places of Arnon. Woe to you, Moab! You are destroyed, people of Chemosh; he has given his sons as fugitives and his daughters into captivity to Sihon, king of the Amorites. We have shot at them—Heshbon is destroyed—even to Dibon, and we have laid waste to Nophah, which reaches to Medeba."

Thus, Israel lived in the land of the Amorites. Moses sent spies to Jazer, and they captured its towns and drove out the Amorites who were there. They then turned and went up the road to Bashan. Og, the king of Bashan, came out against them with all his people to battle at Edrei. The Lord said to Moses, "Do not fear him, for I have delivered him into your hand, along with all his people and his land. Do to him as you did to Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon." So they defeated him, his sons, and all his people, leaving no survivors, and they took possession of his land.

The Israelites journeyed and camped in the plains of Moab beyond the Jordan at Jericho.

Balak, son of Zippor, saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites. Moab was very afraid of the people because they were many, and Moab was overcome with dread because of the Israelites. Moab said to the elders of Midian, "This horde will lick up everything around us, as an ox licks up the grass of the field." Balak, son of Zippor, was king of Moab at that time. He sent messengers to Balaam, son of Beor, at Pethor, near the river, in the land of his people, saying, "A people has come out of Egypt; they cover the face of the earth and are settling next to me. Come now, curse these people for me, for they are too powerful for me. Perhaps I will be able to defeat them and drive them out of the land, for I know that whoever you bless is blessed, and whoever you curse is cursed."

The elders of Moab and Midian left with the fees for divination in their hands. They came to Balaam and told him Balak's message. Balaam said to them, "Stay here tonight, and I will bring you back the word the Lord speaks to me." So the Moabite princes stayed with Balaam. God came to Balaam and asked, "Who are these men with you?" Balaam said to God, "Balak, son of Zippor, king of Moab, sent me this message: 'A people has come out of Egypt and covers the face of the earth. Now come and curse them for me; perhaps I will be able to fight them and drive them away.'" But God said to Balaam, "Do not go with them. You must not curse the people, for they are blessed."

Balaam got up in the morning and told Balak's princes, "Go back to your own country, for the Lord has refused to let me go with you." The Moabite princes returned to Balak and said, "Balaam refused to come with us." Then Balak sent other princes, more numerous and more distinguished than the first. They came to Balaam and said, "This is what Balak, son of Zippor, says: 'Do not let anything keep you from coming to me, for I will reward you handsomely and do whatever you say. Come and curse these people for me.'"

Balaam answered Balak's servants, "Even if Balak gave me his palace filled with silver and gold, I could not do anything great or small to go beyond the command of the Lord my God. Now stay here tonight as the others did, and I will find out what else the Lord will tell me." That night, God came to Balaam and said, "Since these men have come to summon you, go with them, but do only what I tell you."

Balaam got up in the morning, saddled his donkey, and went with the Moabite princes. But God was very angry when he went, and the angel of the Lord stood in the road to oppose him. Balaam was riding his donkey, and his two servants were with him. When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand, it turned off the road into a field. Balaam beat it to get it back on the road.

Then the angel of the Lord stood in a narrow path through the vineyards, with walls on both sides. When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord, it pressed close to the wall, crushing Balaam's foot against it. So he beat the donkey again. Then the angel of the Lord moved on ahead and stood in a narrow place where there was no room to turn, either to the right or to the left. When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord, it lay down under Balaam, and he was angry and beat it with his staff. Then the Lord opened the donkey's mouth, and it said to Balaam, "What have I done to you to make you beat me these three times?"

Balaam answered the donkey, "You have made a fool of me! If I had a sword in my hand, I would kill you right now." The donkey said to Balaam, "Am I not your own donkey, which you have always ridden, to this day? Have I been in the habit of doing this to you?" "No," he said.

Then the Lord opened Balaam's eyes, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the road with his sword drawn. So he bowed low and fell facedown. The angel of the Lord asked him, "Why have you beaten your donkey these three times? I have come here to oppose you because your path is a reckless one before me. The donkey saw me and turned away from me these three times. If it had not turned away, I would certainly have killed you by now, but I would have spared it."

Balaam said to the angel of the Lord, "I have sinned. I did not realize you were standing in the road to oppose me. Now if you are displeased, I will go back." The angel of the Lord said to Balaam, "Go with the men, but speak only what I tell you." So Balaam went with Balak's princes.

When Balak heard that Balaam was coming, he went out to meet him at the Moabite town on the Arnon border, at the edge of his territory. Balak said to Balaam, "Did I not send you an urgent summons? Why didn't you come to me? Am I really not able to reward you?" "Well, I have come to you now," Balaam replied. "But I can't say whatever I please. I must speak only what God puts in my mouth."

Then Balaam went with Balak to Kiriath Huzoth. Balak sacrificed cattle and sheep and gave some to Balaam and the princes who were with him. The next morning, Balak took Balaam up to Bamoth Baal, and from there he could see the outskirts of the Israelite camp.

Balaam said to Balak, "Build me seven altars here, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me." Balak did as Balaam said, and the two of them offered a bull and a ram on each altar. Then Balaam said to Balak, "Stay here beside your offering while I go aside. Perhaps the Lord will come to meet with me. Whatever he reveals to me, I will tell you." Then he went off to a barren height.

God met with him, and Balaam said, "I have prepared seven altars, and on each altar, I have offered a bull and a ram." The Lord put a message in Balaam's mouth and said, "Go back to Balak and give him this message." So he went back to him and found him standing beside his offering, with all the Moabite officials.

Balak said to Balaam, "What did the Lord say?" Then Balaam spoke his message: "Balak brought me from Aram, the king of Moab from the eastern mountains. 'Come,' he said, 'curse Jacob for me; come, denounce Israel.' How can I curse those whom God has not cursed? How can I denounce those whom the Lord has not denounced?"From the top of the rocks, I see them, and from the hills, I behold them: a people who live apart and are not counted among the nations. Who can count the dust of Jacob or number even a fourth of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and may my end be like theirs!

Balaam continued his message: "Rise, Balak, and listen; hear me, son of Zippor. God is not human, that He should lie, not a human being, that He should change His mind. Does He speak and then not act? Does He promise and not fulfill? I have received a command to bless; He has blessed, and I cannot change it. No misfortune is seen in Jacob, no misery observed in Israel. The Lord their God is with them; the shout of the King is among them. God brought them out of Egypt; they have the strength of a wild ox. There is no divination against Jacob, no evil omens against Israel. It will now be said of Jacob and of Israel, 'See what God has done!' The people rise like a lioness; they rouse themselves like a lion that does not rest till it devours its prey and drinks the blood of its victims."

Balak said to Balaam, "Neither curse them at all nor bless them at all!" But Balaam answered, "Did I not tell you I must do whatever the Lord says?"

Then Balak said to Balaam, "Come, let me take you to another place. Perhaps it will please God to let you curse them for me from there." And Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, overlooking the wasteland. Balaam said, "Build me seven altars here, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me." Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bull and a ram on each altar.

When Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, he did not resort to divination as at other times but turned his face toward the wilderness. When Balaam looked out and saw Israel encamped tribe by tribe, the Spirit of God came on him, and he delivered this message:

"The prophecy of Balaam son of Beor, the prophecy of one whose eye sees clearly, the prophecy of one who hears the words of God, who sees a vision from the Almighty, who falls prostrate, and whose eyes are opened: How beautiful are your tents, Jacob, your dwelling places, Israel! Like valleys they spread out, like gardens beside a river, like aloes planted by the Lord, like cedars beside the waters. Water will flow from their buckets; their seed will have abundant water. Their king will be greater than Agag; their kingdom will be exalted. God brought them out of Egypt; they have the strength of a wild ox. They devour hostile nations and break their bones in pieces; with their arrows, they pierce them. Like a lion they crouch and lie down, like a lioness—who dares to rouse them? May those who bless you be blessed and those who curse you be cursed!"

Then Balak's anger burned against Balaam. He struck his hands together and said, "I summoned you to curse my enemies, but you have blessed them these three times. Now leave at once and go home! I said I would reward you handsomely, but the Lord has kept you from being rewarded."

Balaam answered Balak, "Did I not tell the messengers you sent me, 'Even if Balak gave me all the silver and gold in his palace, I could not do anything of my own accord, good or bad, to go beyond the command of the Lord—and I must say only what the Lord says'? Now I am going back to my people, but come, let me warn you of what this people will do to your people in days to come."

Then he spoke his message: "The prophecy of Balaam son of Beor, the prophecy of one whose eye sees clearly, the prophecy of one who hears the words of God, who has knowledge from the Most High, who sees a vision from the Almighty, who falls prostrate, and whose eyes are opened: I see him, but not now; I behold him, but not near. A star will come out of Jacob; a scepter will rise out of Israel. He will crush the foreheads of Moab, the skulls of all the people of Sheth. Edom will be conquered; Seir, his enemy, will be conquered, but Israel will grow strong. A ruler will come out of Jacob and destroy the survivors of the city."

Then Balaam saw Amalek and spoke his message: "Amalek was first among the nations, but their end will be utter destruction."

Then he saw the Kenites and spoke his message: "Your dwelling place is secure, your nest is set in a rock; yet you Kenites will be destroyed when Ashur takes you captive."

Then he spoke his message: "Alas! Who can live when God does this? Ships will come from the shores of Cyprus; they will subdue Ashur and Eber, but they too will come to ruin."

Then Balaam got up and returned home, and Balak went his own way.

While Israel was staying in Shittim, the men began to indulge in sexual immorality with Moabite women, who invited them to the sacrifices to their gods. The people ate the sacrificial meal and bowed down before these gods. So Israel yoked themselves to the Baal of Peor. And the Lord's anger burned against them.

The Lord said to Moses, "Take all the leaders of these people, kill them and expose them in broad daylight before the Lord, so that the Lord's fierce anger may turn away from Israel." So Moses said to Israel's judges, "Each of you must put to death those of your people who have yoked themselves to the Baal of Peor."

Then an Israelite man brought into the camp a Midianite woman right before the eyes of Moses and the whole assembly of Israel while they were weeping at the entrance to the tent of meeting. When Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, the priest, saw this, he left the assembly, took a spear in his hand, and followed the Israelite into the tent. He drove the spear into both of them—through the Israelite and into the woman's stomach. Then the plague against the Israelites was stopped; but those who died in the plague numbered 24,000.

The Lord said to Moses, "Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, the priest, has turned my anger away from the Israelites. Since he was as zealous for my honor among them as I am, I did not put an end to them in my zeal. Therefore tell him I am making my covenant of peace with him. He and his descendants will have a covenant of a lasting priesthood because he was zealous for the honor of his God and made atonement for the Israelites."

The name of the Israelite who was killed with the Midianite woman was Zimri son of Salu, the leader of a Simeonite family. And the name of the Midianite woman who was put to death was Cozbi daughter of Zur, a tribal chief of a Midianite family.

The Lord said to Moses, "Treat the Midianites as enemies and kill them. They treated you as enemies when they deceived you in the Peor incident involving their sister Cozbi, the daughter of a Midianite leader, the woman who was killed when the plague came as a result of that incident."

After the plague, the Lord said to Moses and Eleazar son of Aaron, the priest, "Take a census of the whole Israelite community by families—all those twenty years old or more who are able to serve in the army of Israel." So on the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho, Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them and said, "Take a census of the men twenty years old or more, as the Lord commanded Moses."

These were the Israelites who came out of Egypt:

The descendants of Reuben, the firstborn son of Israel, were: through Hanoch, the Hanochite clan; through Pallu, the Palluite clan; through Hezron, the Hezronite clan; through Carmi, the Carmite clan. These were the clans of Reuben; those numbered were 43,730. The son of Pallu was Eliab, and the sons of Eliab were Nemuel, Dathan, and Abiram. The same Dathan and Abiram were the community officials who rebelled against Moses and Aaron and were among Korah's followers when they rebelled against the Lord. The earth opened its mouth and swallowed them along with Korah, whose followers died when the fire devoured the 250 men. And they served as a warning sign. The line of Korah, however, did not die out.

The descendants of Simeon by their clans were: through Nemuel, the Nemuelite clan; through Jamin, the Jaminite clan; through Jakin, the Jakinite clan; through Zerah, the Zerahite clan; through Shaul, the Shaulite clan. These were the clans of Simeon; those numbered were 22,200.These are the families of the Simeonites, totaling 22,200 people.

The descendants of Gad by their families were:
- Zephonites from Zephon
- Haggites from Haggi
- Shunites from Shuni
- Oznites from Ozni
- Erites from Eri
- Arodites from Arod
- Arelites from Areli

The total number of Gad's descendants was 40,500.

The descendants of Judah were:
- Er and Onan, who died in Canaan
- Shelanites from Shelah
- Perezites from Perez
- Zerahites from Zerah

The descendants of Perez were:
- Hezronites from Hezron
- Hamulites from Hamul

The total number of Judah's descendants was 76,500.

The descendants of Issachar by their families were:
- Tolaites from Tola
- Punites from Puvah
- Jashubites from Jashub
- Shimronites from Shimron

The total number of Issachar's descendants was 64,300.

The descendants of Zebulun by their families were:
- Seredites from Sered
- Elonites from Elon
- Jahleelites from Jahleel

The total number of Zebulun's descendants was 60,500.

The descendants of Joseph by their families were Manasseh and Ephraim.

The descendants of Manasseh were:
- Machirites from Machir (Machir fathered Gilead)
- Gileadites from Gilead

The descendants of Gilead were:
- Iezerites from Iezer
- Helekites from Helek
- Asrielites from Asriel
- Shechemites from Shechem
- Shemidaites from Shemida
- Hepherites from Hepher

Zelophehad, son of Hepher, had no sons but daughters named Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

The total number of Manasseh's descendants was 52,700.

The descendants of Ephraim by their families were:
- Shuthelahites from Shuthelah
- Becherites from Becher
- Tahanites from Tahan

The descendants of Shuthelah were:
- Eranites from Eran

The total number of Ephraim's descendants was 32,500.

The descendants of Benjamin by their families were:
- Belaites from Bela
- Ashbelites from Ashbel
- Ahiramites from Ahiram
- Shuphamites from Shephupham
- Huphamites from Hupham

The descendants of Bela were:
- Ardites from Ard
- Naamites from Naaman

The total number of Benjamin's descendants was 45,600.

The descendants of Dan by their families were:
- Shuhamites from Shuham

The total number of Dan's descendants was 64,400.

The descendants of Asher by their families were:
- Imnites from Imnah
- Ishvites from Ishvi
- Beriites from Beriah

The descendants of Beriah were:
- Heberites from Heber
- Malchielites from Malchiel

Asher had a daughter named Serah.

The total number of Asher's descendants was 53,400.

The descendants of Naphtali by their families were:
- Jahzeelites from Jahzeel
- Gunites from Guni
- Jezerites from Jezer
- Shillemites from Shillem

The total number of Naphtali's descendants was 45,400.

The total number of Israelites counted was 601,730.

The Levites were counted separately by their families:
- Gershonites from Gershon
- Kohathites from Kohath
- Merarites from Merari

The families of Levi included:
- Libnites
- Hebronites
- Mahlites
- Mushites
- Korahites

Kohath fathered Amram. Amram's wife was Jochebed, a daughter of Levi born in Egypt. She bore Aaron, Moses, and their sister Miriam. Aaron's sons were Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. Nadab and Abihu died when they offered unauthorized fire before the Lord.

The total number of Levites was 23,000 males from a month old and upward. They were not counted among the Israelites because they had no inheritance among them.

The Lord instructed Moses to divide the land among the Israelites according to the number of names. Larger groups were to receive larger inheritances, and smaller groups smaller inheritances. The land was to be divided by lot according to the names of the tribes of their ancestors.

Moses and Eleazar the priest counted the Israelites in the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho. None of the men counted by Moses and Aaron in the wilderness of Sinai were among them, except Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun, as the Lord had said they would die in the wilderness.

The daughters of Zelophehad approached Moses, Eleazar the priest, and the leaders of the congregation at the entrance to the tent of meeting. They said their father died in the wilderness and had no sons. They asked for a possession among their father's relatives. Moses brought their case before the Lord, who instructed him to grant their request and establish a statute for inheritance.

Moses asked the Lord to appoint a leader for the congregation so they would not be like sheep without a shepherd. The Lord instructed Moses to appoint Joshua son of Nun, a man with the spirit, and to lay his hand on him. Joshua was to be presented before Eleazar the priest and the congregation, and Moses was to give him some of his authority so the Israelites would obey him. Joshua would seek guidance from Eleazar, who would use the Urim to determine the Lord's will.Moses did as the Lord commanded. He took Joshua and presented him before Eleazar the priest and the entire congregation. Moses laid his hands on Joshua and gave him a charge, as instructed by the Lord.

**Numbers Unit XII (28:1-30:17)**

The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, "Command the Israelites to present offerings to Me at the appointed times. These offerings, made by fire, are a pleasing aroma to Me. 

Daily Offerings:
- Offer two year-old male lambs without blemish every day as a continual burnt offering.
- One lamb in the morning and the other at dusk.
- Along with each lamb, offer a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a quarter of a hin of beaten oil.
- This is a continual burnt offering, first given at Mount Sinai, a pleasing aroma to the Lord.
- The drink offering for each lamb is a quarter of a hin of strong drink, poured out in the holy place.

Sabbath Offerings:
- On the Sabbath, offer two year-old male lambs without blemish, along with two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil, and the drink offering.

New Moon Offerings:
- On the first day of each month, offer two young bulls, one ram, and seven year-old male lambs without blemish.
- Each bull's meal offering is three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil.
- Each ram's meal offering is two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil.
- Each lamb's meal offering is one-tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil.
- The drink offerings are half a hin of wine for each bull, a third of a hin for each ram, and a quarter of a hin for each lamb.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.

Passover Offerings:
- On the fourteenth day of the first month is the Lord's Passover.
- On the fifteenth day, a feast begins, lasting seven days, during which unleavened bread is eaten.
- On the first day, hold a holy convocation and do no work.
- Offer two young bulls, one ram, and seven year-old male lambs without blemish.
- The meal offerings are three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil for each bull, two-tenths for each ram, and one-tenth for each lamb.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.
- These offerings are in addition to the daily burnt offering and its drink offering.
- On the seventh day, hold another holy convocation and do no work.

Feast of Weeks Offerings:
- On the day of first fruits, when you present a new grain offering to the Lord, hold a holy convocation and do no work.
- Offer two young bulls, one ram, and seven year-old male lambs without blemish.
- The meal offerings are three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil for each bull, two-tenths for each ram, and one-tenth for each lamb.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.

Vows:
- When a man makes a vow to the Lord or swears an oath to bind himself, he must not break his word.
- When a woman makes a vow in her father's house, and her father hears it and says nothing, her vow stands.
- If her father disallows it, her vow does not stand, and the Lord will forgive her.
- If a woman makes a vow after marriage and her husband hears it and says nothing, her vow stands.
- If her husband disallows it, her vow does not stand, and the Lord will forgive her.
- The vow of a widow or divorced woman stands against her.
- If a woman makes a vow in her husband's house and he hears it and says nothing, her vow stands.
- If her husband nullifies it, her vow does not stand, and the Lord will forgive her.

Seventh Month Offerings:
- On the first day of the seventh month, hold a holy convocation and do no work. It is a day of blowing the horn.
- Offer one young bull, one ram, and seven year-old male lambs without blemish.
- The meal offerings are three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil for the bull, two-tenths for the ram, and one-tenth for each lamb.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.

Day of Atonement:
- On the tenth day of the seventh month, hold a holy convocation and afflict your souls. Do no work.
- Offer one young bull, one ram, and seven year-old male lambs without blemish.
- The meal offerings are three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil for the bull, two-tenths for the ram, and one-tenth for each lamb.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.

Feast of Tabernacles:
- On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, hold a holy convocation and do no work. Celebrate a feast to the Lord for seven days.
- On the first day, offer thirteen young bulls, two rams, and fourteen year-old male lambs without blemish.
- The meal offerings are three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil for each bull, two-tenths for each ram, and one-tenth for each lamb.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.
- On the second day, offer twelve young bulls, two rams, and fourteen year-old male lambs without blemish.
- The meal offerings and drink offerings are according to the number of bulls, rams, and lambs.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.
- On the third day, offer eleven young bulls, two rams, and fourteen year-old male lambs without blemish.
- The meal offerings and drink offerings are according to the number of bulls, rams, and lambs.
- Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering.On the fourth day, offer ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen one-year-old male lambs without blemish. Each animal's meal and drink offerings should be according to the prescribed amounts. Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its meal and drink offerings.

On the fifth day, offer nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen one-year-old male lambs without blemish. Each animal's meal and drink offerings should be according to the prescribed amounts. Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its meal and drink offerings.

On the sixth day, offer eight bulls, two rams, and fourteen one-year-old male lambs without blemish. Each animal's meal and drink offerings should be according to the prescribed amounts. Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its meal and drink offerings.

On the seventh day, offer seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen one-year-old male lambs without blemish. Each animal's meal and drink offerings should be according to the prescribed amounts. Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its meal and drink offerings.

On the eighth day, hold a solemn assembly and do no regular work. Offer one bull, one ram, and seven one-year-old male lambs without blemish. Each animal's meal and drink offerings should be according to the prescribed amounts. Also, offer one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its meal and drink offerings.

These offerings are to be made to the Lord at the appointed times, in addition to your vows and freewill offerings, whether they are burnt offerings, meal offerings, drink offerings, or peace offerings.

Moses conveyed all these commands from the Lord to the Israelites.

Regarding vows, if a woman makes a vow or a binding oath, her husband can either let it stand or nullify it. If he remains silent, her vows stand. If he nullifies them after hearing them, he bears her iniquity. These are the statutes the Lord commanded Moses concerning relationships between a man and his wife, and between a father and his young daughter living in his house.

Numbers Unit XIII (31:1-36:13)

The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, "Avenge the Israelites on the Midianites, then you will be gathered to your people." Moses instructed the people to arm themselves for war against Midian, with a thousand men from each tribe. They went to war, led by Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, carrying holy vessels and trumpets. They killed all the Midianite males, including their kings and Balaam son of Beor. They took the women, children, cattle, flocks, and goods as plunder and burned all their cities and encampments.

Moses, Eleazar, and the leaders of the congregation went out to meet the returning warriors. Moses was angry with the officers for sparing the women, who had led Israel into sin at Peor. He commanded them to kill all the male children and any woman who had been with a man, but to keep the virgin girls alive. They were to purify themselves and their captives on the third and seventh days, and purify all garments and items made of skin, goat hair, and wood.

The children of Reuben and Gad, who had large herds, saw that the land of Jazer and Gilead was suitable for cattle. They asked Moses and Eleazar if they could settle there instead of crossing the Jordan. Moses questioned their motives, reminding them of their ancestors' failure to enter the promised land, which had angered the Lord and led to forty years of wandering. The Reubenites and Gadites promised to help the other tribes conquer the land before settling in their chosen territory.

Eleazar instructed the warriors to purify all metals by fire and water. They were to wash their clothes on the seventh day and then re-enter the camp.

The Lord commanded Moses to take a census of the plunder and divide it between the warriors and the rest of the congregation. A tribute was to be given to the Lord from the warriors' share.Take one out of every fifty people, cattle, donkeys, and sheep from the Israelites' share and give them to the Levites, who are responsible for the Lord's tabernacle. Moses and Eleazar the priest followed the Lord's command. The total plunder, excluding what the soldiers took, was 675,000 sheep, 72,000 cattle, 61,000 donkeys, and 32,000 women who had never been with a man.

Half of the plunder, the share for those who fought, included 337,500 sheep, of which 675 were the Lord's tribute, 36,000 cattle, of which 72 were the Lord's tribute, 30,500 donkeys, of which 61 were the Lord's tribute, and 16,000 people, of which 32 were the Lord's tribute. Moses gave the Lord's tribute to Eleazar the priest, as commanded.

From the Israelites' half, Moses took one out of every fifty people and animals and gave them to the Levites, as the Lord commanded. The officers of the army reported to Moses that none of their men were missing. They brought gold jewelry as an offering to the Lord to make atonement for themselves. Moses and Eleazar took the gold and brought it to the tent of meeting as a memorial for the Israelites.

Moses told the Reubenites and Gadites that if they armed themselves for battle and helped conquer the land, they could settle in Gilead. If they didn't, they would have to settle in Canaan. The Reubenites and Gadites agreed to Moses' terms. Moses then gave instructions to Eleazar, Joshua, and the tribal leaders about the agreement. The Reubenites and Gadites built cities and sheepfolds in Gilead, while the half-tribe of Manasseh took other territories.

The Israelites' journey from Egypt was recorded by Moses as commanded by the Lord. They left Rameses on the fifteenth day of the first month, the day after Passover, while the Egyptians were burying their firstborn. They traveled from Rameses to Succoth, then to Etham, and turned back to Pi Hahiroth, near Baal Zephon, and camped before Migdol. They crossed the sea into the wilderness, journeyed to Marah, then to Elim, where there were twelve springs and seventy palm trees, and camped by the Red Sea. They continued through various locations, including the wilderness of Sin, Dophkah, Alush, Rephidim, the wilderness of Sinai, Kibroth Hattaavah, Hazeroth, Rithmah, Rimmon Perez, Libnah, Rissah, Kehelathah, Mount Shepher, Haradah, Makheloth, Tahath, Terah, Mithkah, Hashmonah, Moseroth, Bene Jaakan, Hor Haggidgad, Jotbathah, Abronah, Ezion Geber, the wilderness of Zin (Kadesh), and Mount Hor, where Aaron died in the fortieth year after leaving Egypt. Aaron was 123 years old when he died. The Canaanite king of Arad heard of the Israelites' approach.The Israelites continued their journey, moving from Mount Hor to Zalmonah, then to Punon, Oboth, Ije-abarim on the Moab border, Dibon-gad, Almon-diblathaim, and finally to the mountains of Abarim near Nebo. They camped in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, stretching from Beth-jeshimoth to Abel-shittim.

The Lord spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, instructing him to tell the Israelites that when they cross the Jordan into Canaan, they must drive out all the inhabitants, destroy their idols and high places, and take possession of the land. They were to distribute the land by lot according to the size of each tribe. If they failed to drive out the inhabitants, those remaining would become a source of trouble.

The Lord also commanded Moses to allocate cities for the Levites from the Israelites' inheritance. These cities would include open land for their livestock and belongings. The Levites were to receive 48 cities in total, including six cities of refuge for those who accidentally killed someone to flee to. These cities were to be distributed proportionally from the larger and smaller tribes.

The Lord further instructed Moses on the borders of Canaan, detailing the southern, western, northern, and eastern boundaries. Moses was to command the Israelites to inherit the land by lot, with the nine and a half tribes receiving their inheritance in Canaan, while the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh had already received their inheritance east of the Jordan.

The Lord also provided laws regarding cities of refuge, where those who killed someone unintentionally could seek asylum until judged by the congregation. These cities were to protect the manslayer from the avenger of blood until the high priest's death. The Israelites were to follow these laws throughout their generations.

Finally, the Lord named the leaders who would distribute the land: Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and one leader from each tribe, including Caleb from the tribe of Judah.Simeon, Shemuel son of Ammihud. From the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad son of Chislon. From the tribe of Dan, a leader named Bukki son of Jogli. From the tribe of Manasseh, a leader named Hanniel son of Ephod. From the tribe of Ephraim, a leader named Kemuel son of Shiphtan. From the tribe of Zebulun, a leader named Eli-zaphan son of Parnach. From the tribe of Issachar, a leader named Paltiel son of Azzan. From the tribe of Asher, a leader named Ahihud son of Shelomi. From the tribe of Naphtali, a leader named Pedahel son of Ammihud. These are the leaders the Lord commanded to divide the inheritance among the Israelites in the land of Canaan.

The heads of the families of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, from the families of Joseph's sons, approached Moses and the leaders of Israel. They said, "The Lord commanded you to give the land as an inheritance by lot to the Israelites, and our brother Zelophehad's inheritance to his daughters. If they marry men from other tribes, their inheritance will be taken from our tribe and added to the tribe they marry into. When the Year of Jubilee comes, their inheritance will be permanently added to the other tribe's inheritance."

Moses, following the Lord's command, said, "The tribe of Joseph's descendants is right. The Lord commands that Zelophehad's daughters may marry anyone they choose, but only within their father's tribe. This way, no inheritance will transfer from one tribe to another; each tribe will keep its own inheritance. Every daughter who inherits land must marry within her father's tribe so that every Israelite will keep their ancestral inheritance."

Zelophehad's daughters—Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Noah—did as the Lord commanded Moses. They married their cousins from the tribe of Manasseh, son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained within their father's tribe.

These are the commands and regulations the Lord gave through Moses to the Israelites in the plains of Moab by the Jordan, across from Jericho.

Deuteronomy Unit 1 (1:1-3:23)

These are the words Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan, in the wilderness, in the Arabah, opposite Suph, between Paran, Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Di-zahab. It takes eleven days to travel from Horeb to Kadesh-barnea by the Mount Seir route. In the fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses spoke to the Israelites according to all the Lord had commanded him concerning them. This was after he defeated Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, who lived in Ashtaroth, at Edrei.

Beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab, Moses began to explain this law, saying: "The Lord our God spoke to us at Horeb, saying, 'You have stayed long enough at this mountain. Turn and take your journey to the hill country of the Amorites and to all the neighboring places in the Arabah, the hill country, the lowland, the Negev, and the seacoast, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the great river, the Euphrates. See, I have set the land before you. Go in and take possession of the land the Lord swore to give to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to their descendants after them.'

At that time, I said to you, 'I cannot carry you by myself. The Lord your God has multiplied you, and now you are as numerous as the stars in the sky. May the Lord, the God of your ancestors, increase you a thousand times and bless you as he has promised! But how can I bear your problems and your burdens and your disputes all by myself? Choose wise, understanding, and knowledgeable men from each of your tribes, and I will appoint them as your leaders.'

You answered me, 'What you propose to do is good.' So I took the leaders of your tribes, wise and respected men, and appointed them as leaders over you, commanders of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens, and as tribal officials. I charged your judges at that time, 'Hear the disputes between your people and judge fairly, whether the case is between two Israelites or between an Israelite and a foreigner residing among you. Do not show partiality in judging; hear both small and great alike. Do not be afraid of anyone, for judgment belongs to God. Bring me any case too hard for you, and I will hear it.' And at that time, I told you everything you were to do.

Then we set out from Horeb and went through all that vast and dreadful wilderness you saw, on the way to the hill country of the Amorites, as the Lord our God had commanded us. When we reached Kadesh-barnea, I said to you, 'You have reached the hill country of the Amorites, which the Lord our God is giving us. See, the Lord your God has given you the land. Go up and take possession of it as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, told you. Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged.'

Then all of you came to me and said, 'Let us send men ahead to spy out the land for us and bring back a report about the route we are to take and the towns we will come to.' The idea seemed good to me; so I selected twelve of you, one man from each tribe. They left and went up into the hill country, and came to the Valley of Eshcol and explored it. Taking with them some of the fruit of the land, they brought it down to us and reported, 'It is a good land that the Lord our God is giving us.'

But you were unwilling to go up; you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God. You grumbled in your tents and said, 'The Lord hates us; so he brought us out of Egypt to deliver us into the hands of the Amorites to destroy us. Where can we go? Our brothers have made our hearts melt in fear. They say, "The people are stronger and taller than we are; the cities are large, with walls up to the sky. We even saw the Anakites there."'

Then I said to you, 'Do not be terrified; do not be afraid of them. The Lord your God, who is going before you, will fight for you, as he did for you in Egypt, before your very eyes, and in the wilderness. There you saw how the Lord your God carried you, as a father carries his son, all the way you went until you reached this place.' In spite of this, you did not trust in the Lord your God, who went ahead of you on your journey, in fire by night and in a cloud by day, to search out places for you to camp and to show you the way you should go.

When the Lord heard what you said, he was angry and solemnly swore: 'No one from this evil generation shall see the good land I swore to give your ancestors, except Caleb son of Jephunneh. He will see it, and I will give him and his descendants the land he set his feet on, because he followed the Lord wholeheartedly.'

Because of you, the Lord became angry with me also and said, 'You shall not enter it, either. But your assistant, Joshua son of Nun, will enter it. Encourage him, because he will lead Israel to inherit it. And the little ones that you said would be taken captive, your children who do not yet know good from bad—they will enter the land. I will give it to them, and they will take possession of it. But as for you, turn around and set out toward the desert along the route to the Red Sea.'

Then you replied, 'We have sinned against the Lord. We will go up and fight, as the Lord our God commanded us.' So every one of you put on his weapons, thinking it easy to go up into the hill country. But the Lord said to me, 'Tell them, "Do not go up and fight, because I will not be with you. You will be defeated by your enemies."' So I told you, but you would not listen. You rebelled against the Lord's command and in your arrogance, you marched up into the hill country.The Israelites disobeyed the Lord's command and arrogantly went up into the hill country. The Amorites who lived there attacked them, chased them like bees, and defeated them all the way to Hormah. The Israelites returned and wept before the Lord, but He did not listen to their cries. They stayed in Kadesh for a long time, as long as they had previously stayed there.

Then we turned back and journeyed into the wilderness toward the Red Sea, as the Lord had instructed. We circled Mount Seir for many days. The Lord then told me, "You have circled this mountain long enough; turn northward. Tell the people they are about to pass through the territory of their relatives, the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir. They will be afraid of you, so be very careful. Do not provoke them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even a footstep, because I have given Mount Seir to Esau as a possession. You are to buy food and water from them with money."

The Lord your God has blessed you in all the work of your hands. He has watched over your journey through this vast wilderness. These forty years the Lord your God has been with you, and you have lacked nothing. So we passed by our relatives, the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir, and continued from Elath and Ezion-geber, turning toward the wilderness of Moab.

The Lord said to me, "Do not harass the Moabites or provoke them to war, for I will not give you any part of their land. I have given Ar to the descendants of Lot as a possession." (The Emim lived there previously, a people as great, numerous, and tall as the Anakim. They were also considered Rephaim, like the Anakim, but the Moabites called them Emim. The Horites used to live in Seir, but the descendants of Esau drove them out, destroyed them, and settled in their place, just as Israel did in the land the Lord gave them as a possession.)

The Lord then said, "Get up and cross the Zered Valley." So we crossed the Zered Valley. The time we took to come from Kadesh-barnea until we crossed the Zered Valley was thirty-eight years, until the entire generation of fighting men had perished from the camp, as the Lord had sworn to them. The Lord's hand was against them until He had completely eliminated them from the camp.

When all the fighting men had perished, the Lord said to me, "Today you are to pass by the region of Moab at Ar. When you come near the Ammonites, do not harass them or provoke them to war, for I will not give you any part of the land of the Ammonites. I have given it to the descendants of Lot as a possession." (This land was also considered a land of the Rephaim, who used to live there, but the Ammonites called them Zamzummim. They were a great and numerous people, as tall as the Anakim. The Lord destroyed them before the Ammonites, who drove them out and settled in their place, just as He did for the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir, when He destroyed the Horites before them. They drove them out and have lived in their place to this day. And as for the Avvim, who lived in villages as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, who came from Caphtor, destroyed them and settled in their place.)

The Lord then said, "Get up, set out, and cross the Arnon Valley. See, I have given into your hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Begin to take possession of it and engage him in battle. Today I will begin to put the dread and fear of you upon all the peoples under heaven. They will hear reports of you and will tremble and be in anguish because of you."

I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with an offer of peace, saying, "Let us pass through your land. We will stay on the main road; we will not turn aside to the right or to the left. Sell us food to eat and water to drink for money, just let us pass through on foot, as the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir, and the Moabites, who live in Ar, did for us, until we cross the Jordan into the land the Lord our God is giving us."

But Sihon king of Heshbon refused to let us pass through, for the Lord your God had made his spirit stubborn and his heart obstinate in order to give him into your hands, as He has now done. The Lord said to me, "See, I have begun to deliver Sihon and his land over to you. Now begin to conquer and possess his land."

When Sihon and all his people came out to fight us at Jahaz, the Lord our God delivered him over to us, and we defeated him, his sons, and all his people. We captured all his cities and completely destroyed them, including the men, women, and children. We left no survivors. We took only the livestock and the plunder from the cities we captured. From Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Valley, and from the city in the valley, even to Gilead, no city was too strong for us. The Lord our God gave us all of them. But you did not go near the land of the Ammonites, all along the Jabbok River, or the cities in the hill country, or any other place the Lord our God had commanded us to avoid.

Next, we turned and went up the road to Bashan. Og, king of Bashan, and his whole army marched out to meet us in battle at Edrei. The Lord said to me, "Do not be afraid of him, for I have delivered him into your hands, along with his whole army and his land. Do to him what you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon."

So the Lord our God also gave into our hands Og, king of Bashan, and all his people. We struck them down, leaving no survivors. At that time, we captured all his cities. There was not one of the sixty cities in the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan, that we did not take. All these cities were fortified with high walls and with gates and bars, and there were also many unwalled villages. We completely destroyed them, as we had done with Sihon king of Heshbon, destroying every city—men, women, and children. But all the livestock and the plunder from their cities we carried off for ourselves.

So at that time, we took from the two Amorite kings the territory east of the Jordan, from the Arnon Valley to Mount Hermon. (Mount Hermon is called Sirion by the Sidonians and Senir by the Amorites.) We captured all the cities on the plateau, all of Gilead, and all of Bashan as far as Salecah and Edrei, cities of Og's kingdom in Bashan. (Og king of Bashan was the last of the Rephaim. His bed was made of iron and was more than thirteen feet long and six feet wide. It is still in Rabbah of the Ammonites.)

At that time, we took possession of this land. I gave to the Reubenites and the Gadites the territory north of Aroer by the Arnon Valley, including half the hill country of Gilead, along with its cities. The rest of Gilead and all of Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh. (The whole region of Argob in Bashan used to be known as the land of the Rephaim. Jair, a descendant of Manasseh, took the whole region of Argob as far as the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites. It was named after him, and to this day it is called Havvoth Jair.) I gave Gilead to Makir. To the Reubenites and the Gadites, I gave the territory extending from Gilead down to the Arnon Valley (the middle of the valley being the border) and out to the Jabbok River, which is the border of the Ammonites. The western border was the Jordan in the Arabah, from Kinnereth to the Sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea), below the slopes of Pisgah.

At that time, I commanded you: "The Lord your God has given you this land to take possession of it. All your able-bodied men, armed for battle, must cross over ahead of the other Israelites. However, your wives, your children, and your livestock (I know you have much livestock) may stay in the towns I have given you, until the Lord gives rest to your fellow Israelites as He has to you, and they too have taken over the land that the Lord your God is giving them across the Jordan. After that, each of you may go back to the possession I have given you."

At that time, I commanded Joshua: "You have seen with your own eyes all that the Lord your God has done to these two kings. The Lord will do the same to all the kingdoms over there where you are going. Do not be afraid of them; the Lord your God Himself will fight for you."

At that time, I pleaded with the Lord: "Sovereign Lord, You have begun to show to Your servant Your greatness and Your strong hand. For what god is there in heaven or on earth who can do the deeds and mighty works You do? Let me go over and see the good land beyond the Jordan—that fine hill country and Lebanon." But because of you, the Lord was angry with me and would not listen. "That is enough," the Lord said. "Do not speak to me anymore about this matter.""God told me, 'That's enough. Don't talk to Me about this matter anymore. Go up to the top of Pisgah and look around in all directions. You can see the land, but you won't cross the Jordan River. Instead, encourage and strengthen Joshua, because he will lead the people across and help them inherit the land you see.' So we stayed in the valley near Beth-peor.

Now, Israel, listen to the laws and rules I am teaching you to follow, so you may live and take possession of the land the Lord, the God of your ancestors, is giving you. Do not add to or subtract from what I command you, but keep the commandments of the Lord your God. You saw what the Lord did at Baal-peor; He destroyed everyone who followed Baal, but all of you who remained faithful to the Lord are alive today.

I have taught you laws and rules as the Lord my God commanded, so you can follow them in the land you are entering. Obey them carefully, for this will show your wisdom and understanding to other nations, who will hear about these laws and say, 'Surely this great nation is wise and understanding.' What other nation is so great as to have their gods near them the way the Lord our God is near us whenever we pray to Him? And what other nation has such righteous laws as this body of laws I am setting before you today?

Be careful and watch yourselves closely so you do not forget the things your eyes have seen or let them fade from your heart as long as you live. Teach them to your children and their children after them. Remember the day you stood before the Lord your God at Horeb, when He said to me, 'Assemble the people before Me to hear My words so they may learn to revere Me as long as they live in the land and may teach them to their children.' You came near and stood at the foot of the mountain while it blazed with fire to the very heavens, with black clouds and deep darkness. Then the Lord spoke to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words but saw no form; there was only a voice. He declared to you His covenant, the Ten Commandments, which He wrote on two stone tablets. At that time, the Lord commanded me to teach you the laws and rules you are to follow in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess.

Be very careful, since you saw no form when the Lord spoke to you at Horeb out of the fire, not to act corruptly and make an idol for yourselves in any shape or form, whether in the likeness of a man or woman, an animal on the earth, a bird that flies in the sky, a creature that moves along the ground, or a fish in the waters below. And when you look up to the sky and see the sun, moon, and stars—all the heavenly array—do not be enticed into bowing down to them and worshiping things the Lord your God has apportioned to all the nations under heaven. But as for you, the Lord took you and brought you out of the iron-smelting furnace, out of Egypt, to be the people of His inheritance, as you are now.

The Lord was angry with me because of you, and He swore that I would not cross the Jordan and enter the good land the Lord your God is giving you as your inheritance. I will die in this land; I will not cross the Jordan, but you are about to cross over and take possession of that good land. Be careful not to forget the covenant of the Lord your God that He made with you; do not make for yourselves an idol in the form of anything the Lord your God has forbidden. For the Lord your God is a consuming fire, a jealous God.

When you have children and grandchildren and have lived in the land a long time, if you then become corrupt and make any kind of idol, doing evil in the eyes of the Lord your God and arousing His anger, I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you this day that you will quickly perish from the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess. You will not live there long but will certainly be destroyed. The Lord will scatter you among the peoples, and only a few of you will survive among the nations to which the Lord will drive you. There you will worship man-made gods of wood and stone, which cannot see or hear or eat or smell. But if from there you seek the Lord your God, you will find Him if you seek Him with all your heart and with all your soul. When you are in distress and all these things have happened to you, then in later days you will return to the Lord your God and obey Him. For the Lord your God is a merciful God; He will not abandon or destroy you or forget the covenant with your ancestors, which He confirmed to them by oath.

Ask now about the former days, long before your time, from the day God created human beings on the earth; ask from one end of the heavens to the other. Has anything so great as this ever happened, or has anything like it ever been heard of? Has any other people heard the voice of God speaking out of fire, as you have, and lived? Has any god ever tried to take for himself one nation out of another nation, by testings, by signs and wonders, by war, by a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, or by great and awesome deeds, like all the things the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes? You were shown these things so that you might know that the Lord is God; besides Him, there is no other. From heaven, He made you hear His voice to discipline you. On earth, He showed you His great fire, and you heard His words from out of the fire. Because He loved your ancestors and chose their descendants after them, He brought you out of Egypt by His Presence and His great strength, to drive out before you nations greater and stronger than you and to bring you into their land to give it to you for your inheritance, as it is today.

Acknowledge and take to heart this day that the Lord is God in heaven above and on the earth below. There is no other. Keep His decrees and commands, which I am giving you today, so that it may go well with you and your children after you and that you may live long in the land the Lord your God gives you for all time.

Then Moses set apart three cities east of the Jordan to which anyone who had killed a person could flee if they had unintentionally killed a neighbor without malice aforethought. They could flee into one of these cities and save their life. The cities were Bezer in the wilderness on the plateau for the Reubenites, Ramoth in Gilead for the Gadites, and Golan in Bashan for the Manassites.

This is the law Moses set before the Israelites. These are the stipulations, decrees, and laws Moses gave them when they came out of Egypt and were in the valley near Beth-peor east of the Jordan, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon and was defeated by Moses and the Israelites as they came out of Egypt. They took possession of his land and the land of Og king of Bashan, the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan. This land extended from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Gorge to Mount Sion (that is, Hermon), and included all the Arabah east of the Jordan, as far as the Dead Sea, below the slopes of Pisgah.""Observe the Sabbath day and keep it holy, as the LORD your God has commanded you. Work for six days, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the LORD your God. On that day, you must not do any work, nor should your son, daughter, male or female servant, ox, donkey, any of your livestock, or any foreigner residing in your towns. This way, your male and female servants can rest just as you do. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the LORD your God brought you out with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Therefore, the LORD your God has commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.

Do not misuse the name of the LORD your God, for the LORD will not hold anyone guiltless who misuses His name.

Honor your father and mother, as the LORD your God has commanded you, so that you may live long and that it may go well with you in the land the LORD your God is giving you.

Do not murder. Do not commit adultery. Do not steal. Do not give false testimony against your neighbor. Do not covet your neighbor's wife. Do not desire your neighbor's house, field, male or female servant, ox, donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.

These are the commandments the LORD proclaimed in a loud voice to your whole assembly on the mountain from out of the fire, the cloud, and the deep darkness. He added nothing more. Then He wrote them on two stone tablets and gave them to me.

Be sure to do what the LORD your God has commanded you; do not turn aside to the right or to the left. Walk in obedience to all that the LORD your God has commanded you, so that you may live and prosper and prolong your days in the land you will possess.

When you heard the voice out of the darkness while the mountain was ablaze with fire, all the leaders of your tribes and your elders came to me. You said, 'The LORD our God has shown us His glory and His majesty, and we have heard His voice from the fire. Today we have seen that a person can live even if God speaks with them. But now, why should we die? This great fire will consume us, and we will die if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any longer. For what mortal has ever heard the voice of the living God speaking out of fire, as we have, and survived? Go near and listen to all that the LORD our God says. Then tell us whatever the LORD our God tells you. We will listen and obey.'

The LORD heard you when you spoke to me, and He said, 'I have heard what this people said to you. Everything they said was good. Oh, that their hearts would be inclined to fear me and keep all my commands always, so that it might go well with them and their children forever! Go, tell them to return to their tents. But you stay here with me so that I may give you all the commands, decrees, and laws you are to teach them to follow in the land I am giving them to possess.'

Hear, O Israel, and be careful to obey so that it may go well with you and that you may increase greatly in a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the LORD, the God of your ancestors, promised you.

Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one. Love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength. These commandments that I give you today are to be on your hearts. Impress them on your children. Talk about them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down and when you get up. Tie them as symbols on your hands and bind them on your foreheads. Write them on the doorframes of your houses and on your gates.

When the LORD your God brings you into the land He swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give you—a land with large, flourishing cities you did not build, houses filled with all kinds of good things you did not provide, wells you did not dig, and vineyards and olive groves you did not plant—then when you eat and are satisfied, be careful that you do not forget the LORD, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery.

Fear the LORD your God, serve Him only, and take your oaths in His name. Do not follow other gods, the gods of the peoples around you; for the LORD your God, who is among you, is a jealous God and His anger will burn against you, and He will destroy you from the face of the land. Do not put the LORD your God to the test as you did at Massah. Be sure to keep the commands of the LORD your God and the stipulations and decrees He has given you. Do what is right and good in the LORD's sight, so that it may go well with you and you may go in and take over the good land the LORD promised on oath to your ancestors, thrusting out all your enemies before you, as the LORD said.

In the future, when your son asks you, 'What is the meaning of the stipulations, decrees, and laws the LORD our God has commanded you?' tell him: 'We were slaves of Pharaoh in Egypt, but the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Before our eyes, the LORD sent signs and wonders—great and terrible—on Egypt and Pharaoh and his whole household. But He brought us out from there to bring us in and give us the land He promised on oath to our ancestors. The LORD commanded us to obey all these decrees and to fear the LORD our God, so that we might always prosper and be kept alive, as is the case today. And if we are careful to obey all this law before the LORD our God, as He has commanded us, that will be our righteousness.'

When the LORD your God brings you into the land you are entering to possess and drives out before you many nations—the Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, seven nations larger and stronger than you—and when the LORD your God has delivered them over to you and you have defeated them, then you must destroy them totally. Make no treaty with them and show them no mercy. Do not intermarry with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons, for they will turn your children away from following me to serve other gods, and the LORD's anger will burn against you and will quickly destroy you. This is what you are to do to them: Break down their altars, smash their sacred stones, cut down their Asherah poles, and burn their idols in the fire.

For you are a people holy to the LORD your God. The LORD your God has chosen you out of all the peoples on the face of the earth to be His people, His treasured possession. The LORD did not set His affection on you and choose you because you were more numerous than other peoples, for you were the fewest of all peoples. But it was because the LORD loved you and kept the oath He swore to your ancestors that He brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed you from the land of slavery, from the power of Pharaoh king of Egypt. Know therefore that the LORD your God is God; He is the faithful God, keeping His covenant of love to a thousand generations of those who love Him and keep His commandments. But those who hate Him, He will repay to their face by destruction; He will not be slow to repay to their face those who hate Him.

Therefore, take care to follow the commands, decrees, and laws I give you today. If you pay attention to these laws and are careful to follow them, then the LORD your God will keep His covenant of love with you, as He swore to your ancestors. He will love you and bless you and increase your numbers. He will bless the fruit of your womb, the crops of your land—your grain, new wine, and olive oil—the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks in the land He swore to your ancestors to give you. You will be blessed more than any other people; none of your men or women will be childless, nor will any of your livestock be without young. The LORD will keep you free from every disease. He will not inflict on you the horrible diseases you knew in Egypt, but He will inflict them on all who hate you."When the LORD your God brings you into the land He promised to your ancestors, He will drive out many nations before you. These nations are larger and stronger than you, but do not be afraid. Remember what the LORD did to Pharaoh and all of Egypt. The same signs, wonders, and mighty acts will be done to these nations. The LORD will send hornets to drive them out until they are destroyed. Do not fear them, for the LORD your God is with you, a great and awesome God.

The LORD will gradually drive out these nations before you, so the wild animals do not become too numerous. He will deliver their kings into your hands, and you will wipe out their names from under heaven. No one will be able to stand against you until you have destroyed them. Do not serve their gods, for that will be a trap for you. Burn their idols and do not covet the silver or gold on them, for it is detestable to the LORD. Do not bring any detestable thing into your house, or you will be set apart for destruction like it. Utterly detest and abhor it, for it is set apart for destruction.

Be careful to follow all the commands I give you today, so you may live and increase and enter the land the LORD promised to your ancestors. Remember how the LORD led you through the wilderness for forty years, humbling and testing you to know what was in your heart. He humbled you, causing you to hunger and then feeding you with manna, to teach you that man does not live on bread alone but on every word that comes from the mouth of the LORD. Your clothes did not wear out, and your feet did not swell during these forty years.

When you have eaten and are satisfied, and have built fine houses and settled down, and when your herds and flocks grow large and your silver and gold increase, do not become proud and forget the LORD your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery. He led you through the vast and dreadful wilderness, with its venomous snakes and scorpions, and brought you water out of hard rock. He gave you manna to eat in the wilderness to humble and test you so that in the end it might go well with you. You may say to yourself, "My power and the strength of my hands have produced this wealth for me." But remember the LORD your God, for it is He who gives you the ability to produce wealth, confirming His covenant.

If you ever forget the LORD your God and follow other gods, worshiping and bowing down to them, you will surely be destroyed. Like the nations the LORD destroyed before you, so you will be destroyed for not obeying the LORD your God.

Listen, Israel: You are about to cross the Jordan to dispossess nations greater and stronger than you, with large cities that have walls up to the sky. The people are strong and tall, descendants of the Anakim. But know that the LORD your God goes before you as a consuming fire. He will destroy them and subdue them before you. Do not say in your heart, "The LORD has brought me here to take possession of this land because of my righteousness." It is not because of your righteousness but because of the wickedness of these nations that the LORD is driving them out. Understand that it is not because of your righteousness, for you are a stubborn people.

Remember how you provoked the LORD to anger in the wilderness. From the day you left Egypt until you arrived here, you have been rebellious. At Horeb, you made the LORD angry enough to destroy you. When I went up the mountain to receive the tablets of the covenant, I stayed forty days and nights without eating or drinking. The LORD gave me the two stone tablets inscribed by His finger. But when I came down, I saw that you had sinned against the LORD by making a molten calf. I broke the tablets and fell prostrate before the LORD for forty days and nights, pleading for you because of your sin.

The LORD was angry enough to destroy Aaron, but I prayed for him too. I took the calf you made, burned it, crushed it, and threw the dust into a stream. You have been rebellious against the LORD from the day I knew you. When the LORD sent you from Kadesh-barnea to possess the land, you rebelled and did not trust Him. I lay prostrate before the LORD for forty days and nights because He said He would destroy you. I prayed, "O Lord GOD, do not destroy Your people, Your inheritance, whom You redeemed by Your greatness and brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Remember Your servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Do not look at the stubbornness of this people or their wickedness and sin."When the LORD your God brings you into the land He promised to your ancestors, He will drive out many nations before you. These nations are larger and stronger than you, but do not be afraid. Remember what the LORD did to Pharaoh and all of Egypt. The same signs, wonders, and mighty acts will be done to these nations. The LORD will send hornets to drive them out until they are destroyed. Do not fear them, for the LORD your God is with you, a great and awesome God.

The LORD will gradually drive out these nations before you, so the wild animals do not become too numerous. He will deliver their kings into your hands, and you will wipe out their names from under heaven. No one will be able to stand against you until you have destroyed them. Do not serve their gods, for that will be a trap for you. Burn their idols and do not covet the silver or gold on them, for it is detestable to the LORD. Do not bring any detestable thing into your house, or you will be set apart for destruction like it. Utterly detest and abhor it, for it is set apart for destruction.

Be careful to follow all the commands I give you today, so you may live and increase and enter the land the LORD promised to your ancestors. Remember how the LORD led you through the wilderness for forty years, humbling and testing you to know what was in your heart. He humbled you, causing you to hunger and then feeding you with manna, to teach you that man does not live on bread alone but on every word that comes from the mouth of the LORD. Your clothes did not wear out, and your feet did not swell during these forty years.

When you have eaten and are satisfied, and have built fine houses and settled down, and when your herds and flocks grow large and your silver and gold increase, do not become proud and forget the LORD your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery. He led you through the vast and dreadful wilderness, with its venomous snakes and scorpions, and brought you water out of hard rock. He gave you manna to eat in the wilderness to humble and test you so that in the end it might go well with you. You may say to yourself, "My power and the strength of my hands have produced this wealth for me." But remember the LORD your God, for it is He who gives you the ability to produce wealth, confirming His covenant.

If you ever forget the LORD your God and follow other gods, worshiping and bowing down to them, you will surely be destroyed. Like the nations the LORD destroyed before you, so you will be destroyed for not obeying the LORD your God.

Listen, Israel: You are about to cross the Jordan to dispossess nations greater and stronger than you, with large cities that have walls up to the sky. The people are strong and tall, descendants of the Anakim. But know that the LORD your God goes before you as a consuming fire. He will destroy them and subdue them before you. Do not say in your heart, "The LORD has brought me here to take possession of this land because of my righteousness." It is not because of your righteousness but because of the wickedness of these nations that the LORD is driving them out. Understand that it is not because of your righteousness, for you are a stubborn people.

Remember how you provoked the LORD to anger in the wilderness. From the day you left Egypt until you arrived here, you have been rebellious. At Horeb, you made the LORD angry enough to destroy you. When I went up the mountain to receive the tablets of the covenant, I stayed forty days and nights without eating or drinking. The LORD gave me the two stone tablets inscribed by His finger. But when I came down, I saw that you had sinned against the LORD by making a molten calf. I broke the tablets and fell prostrate before the LORD for forty days and nights, pleading for you because of your sin.

The LORD was angry enough to destroy Aaron, but I prayed for him too. I took the calf you made, burned it, crushed it, and threw the dust into a stream. You have been rebellious against the LORD from the day I knew you. When the LORD sent you from Kadesh-barnea to possess the land, you rebelled and did not trust Him. I lay prostrate before the LORD for forty days and nights because He said He would destroy you. I prayed, "O Lord GOD, do not destroy Your people, Your inheritance, whom You redeemed by Your greatness and brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Remember Your servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Do not look at the stubbornness of this people or their wickedness and sin."

They might say, "Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land He promised them, and because He hated them, He brought them out to kill them in the wilderness." But they are Your people and Your inheritance, whom You brought out by Your great power and Your outstretched arm.

The Israelites traveled from Beeroth-benejaakan to Moserah; there Aaron died and was buried, and his son Eleazar succeeded him as priest. At that time, the LORD said to me, "Chisel out two stone tablets like the first ones and come up to Me on the mountain. Also, make a wooden ark. I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke. Then you shall put them in the ark." So I made an ark out of acacia wood and chiseled out two stone tablets like the first ones. I went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hands. The LORD wrote on these tablets what He had written before, the Ten Commandments He had spoken to you on the mountain out of the fire on the day of the assembly. Then I came back down the mountain and put the tablets in the ark I had made, as the LORD commanded me, and they are there now.

From there, the Israelites traveled to Gudgodah and then to Jotbathah, a land with streams of water. At that time, the LORD set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to minister, and to pronounce blessings in His name, as they still do today. That is why the Levites have no share or inheritance among their fellow Israelites; the LORD is their inheritance, as the LORD your God told them.

I stayed on the mountain for forty days and nights, as I did the first time, and the LORD listened to me again. He did not want to destroy you. The LORD said to me, "Go and lead the people on their way, so they may enter and possess the land I swore to their ancestors to give them."

And now, Israel, what does the LORD your God ask of you but to fear the LORD your God, to walk in obedience to Him, to love Him, to serve the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul, and to observe the LORD's commands and decrees that I am giving you today for your own good? To the LORD your God belong the heavens, even the highest heavens, the earth and everything in it. Yet the LORD set His affection on your ancestors and loved them, and He chose you, their descendants, above all the nations, as it is today. Circumcise your hearts, therefore, and do not be stiff-necked any longer. For the LORD your God is God of gods and Lord of lords, the great God, mighty and awesome, who shows no partiality and accepts no bribes. He defends the cause of the fatherless and the widow, and loves the foreigner residing among you, giving them food and clothing. And you are to love those who are foreigners, for you yourselves were foreigners in Egypt. Fear the LORD your God and serve Him. Hold fast to Him and take your oaths in His name. He is the one you praise; He is your God, who performed for you those great and awesome wonders you saw with your own eyes. Your ancestors who went down into Egypt were seventy in all, and now the LORD your God has made you as numerous as the stars in the sky.

Love the LORD your God and keep His requirements, His decrees, His laws, and His commands always. Remember today that your children were not the ones who saw and experienced the discipline of the LORD your God: His majesty, His mighty hand, His outstretched arm; the signs He performed and the things He did in the heart of Egypt, both to Pharaoh king of Egypt and to his whole country; what He did to the Egyptian army, to its horses and chariots, how He overwhelmed them with the waters of the Red Sea as they pursued you, and how the LORD brought lasting ruin on them. It was not your children who saw what He did for you in the wilderness until you arrived at this place, and what He did to Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab the Reubenite, when the earth opened its mouth right in the middle of all Israel and swallowed them up with their households, their tents, and every living thing that belonged to them. But it was your own eyes that saw all these great things the LORD has done.

Observe therefore all the commands I am giving you today, so that you may have the strength to go in and take over the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess, and so that you may live long in the land the LORD swore to your ancestors to give to them and their descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey. The land you are entering to take over is not like the land of Egypt, from which you have come, where you planted your seed and irrigated it by foot as in a vegetable garden. But the land you are crossing the Jordan to take possession of is a land of mountains and valleys that drinks rain from heaven. It is a land the LORD your God cares for; the eyes of the LORD your God are continually on it from the beginning of the year to its end.

So if you faithfully obey the commands I am giving you today—to love the LORD your God and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul—then I will send rain on your land in its season, both autumn and spring rains, so that you may gather in your grain, new wine, and olive oil. I will provide grass in the fields for your cattle, and you will eat and be satisfied. Be careful, or you will be enticed to turn away and worship other gods and bow down to them. Then the LORD's anger will burn against you, and He will shut up the heavens so that it will not rain and the ground will yield no produce, and you will soon perish from the good land the LORD is giving you.

Fix these words of mine in your hearts and minds; tie them as symbols on your hands and bind them on your foreheads. Teach them to your children, talking about them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down and when you get up. Write them on the doorframes of your houses and on your gates, so that your days and the days of your children may be many in the land the LORD swore to give your ancestors, as many as the days that the heavens are above the earth.

If you carefully observe all these commands I am giving you to follow—to love the LORD your God, to walk in obedience to Him and to hold fast to Him—then the LORD will drive out all these nations before you, and you will dispossess nations larger and stronger than you. Every place where you set your foot will be yours: Your territory will extend from the desert to Lebanon, and from the Euphrates River to the Mediterranean Sea. No one will be able to stand against you. The LORD your God, as He promised you, will put the terror and fear of you on the whole land, wherever you go.

See, I am setting before you today a blessing and a curse—the blessing if you obey the commands of the LORD your God that I am giving you today; the curse if you disobey the commands of the LORD your God and turn from the way that I command you today by following other gods, which you have not known. When the LORD your God has brought you into the land you are entering to possess, you are to proclaim the blessings on Mount Gerizim and the curses on Mount Ebal. As you know, these mountains are across the Jordan, west of the road, toward the setting sun, near the great trees of Moreh, in the territory of those Canaanites living in the Arabah in the vicinity of Gilgal. You are about to cross the Jordan to enter and take possession of the land the LORD your God is giving you. When you have taken it over and are living there, be sure that you obey all the decrees and laws I am setting before you today."Hold fast to Him and swear by His name. He is your glory and your God, who has done these great and awesome things that you have seen with your own eyes. Your ancestors went down to Egypt with seventy people, and now the LORD your God has made you as numerous as the stars in the sky.

Love the LORD your God and always keep His requirements, decrees, laws, and commands. Remember today that it was not your children who saw and experienced the discipline of the LORD your God—His greatness, His mighty hand, His outstretched arm, the signs He performed, and the things He did in Egypt to Pharaoh and his entire country. They did not see what He did to the Egyptian army, their horses, and chariots, how He overwhelmed them with the waters of the Red Sea as they pursued you, and how the LORD brought lasting ruin on them. They did not see what He did for you in the wilderness until you arrived at this place, or what He did to Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab the Reubenite, when the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them, their households, tents, and every living thing that belonged to them. But it was your own eyes that saw all these great things the LORD has done.

Therefore, observe all the commands I am giving you today, so that you may have the strength to go in and take over the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess, and so that you may live long in the land the LORD swore to give to your ancestors and their descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey. The land you are entering to take over is not like the land of Egypt, from which you came, where you planted your seed and irrigated it by foot as in a vegetable garden. But the land you are crossing the Jordan to take possession of is a land of mountains and valleys that drinks rain from heaven. It is a land the LORD your God cares for; the eyes of the LORD your God are continually on it from the beginning of the year to its end.

If you faithfully obey the commands I am giving you today—to love the LORD your God and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul—then I will send rain on your land in its season, both autumn and spring rains, so that you may gather in your grain, new wine, and olive oil. I will provide grass in the fields for your cattle, and you will eat and be satisfied. Be careful, or you will be enticed to turn away and worship other gods and bow down to them. Then the LORD's anger will burn against you, and He will shut up the heavens so that it will not rain and the ground will yield no produce, and you will soon perish from the good land the LORD is giving you.

Fix these words of mine in your hearts and minds; tie them as symbols on your hands and bind them on your foreheads. Teach them to your children, talking about them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down and when you get up. Write them on the doorframes of your houses and on your gates, so that your days and the days of your children may be many in the land the LORD swore to give your ancestors, as many as the days that the heavens are above the earth.

If you carefully observe all these commands I am giving you to follow—to love the LORD your God, to walk in obedience to Him and to hold fast to Him—then the LORD will drive out all these nations before you, and you will dispossess nations larger and stronger than you. Every place where you set your foot will be yours: Your territory will extend from the desert to Lebanon, and from the Euphrates River to the Mediterranean Sea. No one will be able to stand against you. The LORD your God, as He promised you, will put the terror and fear of you on the whole land, wherever you go.

See, I am setting before you today a blessing and a curse—the blessing if you obey the commands of the LORD your God that I am giving you today; the curse if you disobey the commands of the LORD your God and turn from the way that I command you today by following other gods, which you have not known. When the LORD your God has brought you into the land you are entering to possess, you are to proclaim the blessings on Mount Gerizim and the curses on Mount Ebal. As you know, these mountains are across the Jordan, west of the road, toward the setting sun, near the great trees of Moreh, in the territory of those Canaanites living in the Arabah in the vicinity of Gilgal. You are about to cross the Jordan to enter and take possession of the land the LORD your God is giving you. When you have taken it over and are living there, be sure that you obey all the decrees and laws I am setting before you today."Do not follow the gods of the people around you, whether they are near or far. If someone tries to lead you to worship other gods, do not listen to them or show them any mercy. You must be the first to act against them, and then all the people should join in. Stone them to death because they tried to turn you away from the LORD your God, who freed you from Egypt. This will serve as a warning to all of Israel to prevent such wickedness.

Be careful not to offer your burnt offerings just anywhere. Offer them only at the place the LORD chooses among your tribes. If you hear that some people in one of your cities are leading others to worship other gods, investigate thoroughly. If it is true, destroy that city completely, including its livestock, and burn all its spoils as an offering to the LORD. The city must remain a ruin forever. Do not keep any of the spoils for yourself, so that the LORD may turn from His anger and show you mercy, as He promised your ancestors.

You may eat meat within your gates, as long as it is not the blood, which must be poured out on the ground. You are a holy people to the LORD, so do not eat anything that dies of itself. You may give it to a foreigner or sell it to a stranger. Do not cook a young goat in its mother's milk.

You must bring a tithe of your crops each year to the place the LORD chooses. If the place is too far, convert your tithe into money and spend it on whatever you desire when you get there. Eat and rejoice before the LORD with your household and do not neglect the Levites.

Every three years, bring all your tithes to your gates so that the Levites, foreigners, orphans, and widows can eat and be satisfied. This will ensure the LORD's blessing on all your work.

Sanctify the firstborn males of your herd and flock to the LORD. Eat them yearly at the place the LORD chooses. If they have any defects, do not sacrifice them but eat them within your gates. Do not eat the blood; pour it out on the ground.

Every seven years, cancel debts. Creditors must release what they have lent to their neighbors and fellow Israelites because the LORD's release has been proclaimed. You may collect from foreigners, but not from your fellow Israelites. There should be no needy among you, for the LORD will bless you in the land He is giving you.Listen carefully to the voice of the LORD your God and follow all the commandments I give you today. The LORD will bless you as promised, and you will lend to many nations but not borrow; you will rule over many nations, but they will not rule over you.

Observe the month of Abib and celebrate Passover to the LORD your God, for it was in this month that the LORD brought you out of Egypt by night. Sacrifice the Passover offering from your flock and herd at the place the LORD chooses. Eat unleavened bread for seven days, the bread of affliction, to remember your hurried departure from Egypt. No leaven should be seen in your territory for seven days, and none of the meat from the sacrifice should remain until morning.

You must not sacrifice the Passover offering within any of your gates but at the place the LORD chooses. Roast and eat it there, then return to your tents in the morning. For six days, eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day, hold a solemn assembly to the LORD and do no work.

If there is a needy person among you, do not harden your heart or close your hand. Open your hand and lend whatever is needed. Do not be stingy because the seventh year, the year of release, is near. Give generously without a grudging heart, and the LORD will bless you in all your work. The poor will always be in the land, so be open-handed toward your fellow Israelites who are poor and needy.

Count seven weeks from when you begin to harvest the grain, then celebrate the Feast of Weeks to the LORD with a freewill offering. Rejoice before the LORD with your family, servants, the Levites, foreigners, orphans, and widows at the place the LORD chooses. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and follow these decrees.

If a fellow Hebrew, man or woman, sells themselves to you, they shall serve for six years, and in the seventh year, you must set them free. When you release them, do not send them away empty-handed. Provide generously from your flock, threshing floor, and winepress, as the LORD has blessed you. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the LORD redeemed you. If the servant chooses to stay because they love you and your household, pierce their ear with an awl, and they will become your servant for life. Do the same for your female servants. Do not consider it a hardship to set them free, for they have served you well, and the LORD will bless you in all you do.

Celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles for seven days after gathering your harvest. Rejoice with your family, servants, the Levites, foreigners, orphans, and widows at the place the LORD chooses. The LORD will bless your harvest and all your work, and you will be joyful. Three times a year, all your males must appear before the LORD at the place He chooses: the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Tabernacles. Do not appear before the LORD empty-handed; each person should give as they are able, according to the blessings the LORD has given them.

Appoint judges and officers in all your towns that the LORD gives you, and they shall judge the people fairly. Do not pervert justice or show partiality. Do not accept bribes, for they blind the eyes of the wise and twist the words of the righteous. Follow justice and live, and you will inherit the land the LORD gives you.

When you enter the land the LORD gives you and take possession of it, you may say, "Let us set a king over us like the other nations." Be sure to appoint the king the LORD chooses, one from among your fellow Israelites. Do not place a foreigner over you. The king must not acquire many horses or return the people to Egypt to get more horses. He must not take many wives or accumulate large amounts of silver and gold. When he takes the throne, he must write a copy of this law and read it all his life to learn to fear the LORD and follow His laws. This will keep him humble and ensure a long reign for him and his descendants.

Do not plant an Asherah pole or set up a sacred stone beside the altar of the LORD. The priests, the Levites, shall have no inheritance among the Israelites; they will live on the offerings made to the LORD. The firstfruits of your grain, wine, oil, and wool should be given to them, for the LORD has chosen them to minister in His name. If a Levite moves to the place the LORD chooses, he may serve there like his fellow Levites and share in the offerings.

Do not sacrifice an ox or sheep with any defect, for that is detestable to the LORD. If someone is found worshiping other gods, investigate thoroughly. If it is true, bring that person to the city gates and stone them to death.If a man or woman is found guilty of doing something evil, bring them to the city gates and stone them to death. A person can only be put to death on the testimony of two or three witnesses, not just one. The witnesses must be the first to throw stones, followed by the rest of the people, to remove the evil from among you.

When you enter the land the LORD your God is giving you, do not adopt the detestable practices of the nations there. Do not sacrifice your children in fire, practice divination, sorcery, witchcraft, cast spells, or consult spirits. These practices are detestable to the LORD, and because of them, He is driving out those nations before you. Be wholehearted with the LORD your God. The nations you will dispossess listen to those who practice sorcery and divination, but the LORD your God has not permitted you to do so.

If a legal matter is too difficult for you to judge, such as cases of bloodshed, lawsuits, or assaults, go to the place the LORD your God will choose. Consult the Levitical priests and the judge in office at that time. They will give you a verdict, and you must act according to their decision. Follow their instructions carefully and do not turn aside from what they tell you.

The LORD your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your fellow Israelites. You must listen to him. This is what you asked of the LORD your God at Horeb on the day of the assembly when you said, "Let us not hear the voice of the LORD our God nor see this great fire anymore, or we will die." The LORD said to me, "What they say is good. I will raise up for them a prophet like you from among their fellow Israelites, and I will put my words in his mouth. He will tell them everything I command him. Anyone who does not listen to my words that the prophet speaks in my name, I will call to account."

If a prophet presumes to speak in my name anything I have not commanded, or speaks in the name of other gods, that prophet must be put to death. You may wonder, "How can we know when a message has not been spoken by the LORD?" If what a prophet proclaims in the name of the LORD does not take place or come true, that is a message the LORD has not spoken. The prophet has spoken presumptuously, so do not be alarmed.

When the LORD your God has destroyed the nations whose land He is giving you, and you have taken possession of their cities and houses, set aside three cities in the land the LORD your God is giving you to possess. Prepare roads to these cities and divide the land into three parts so that anyone who kills someone unintentionally may flee there.

When you go to war against your enemies and see horses and chariots and an army greater than yours, do not be afraid, for the LORD your God, who brought you out of Egypt, will be with you. Before the battle, the priest shall come forward and address the army, saying, "Hear, O Israel, today you are going into battle against your enemies. Do not be fainthearted or afraid; do not panic or be terrified by them. For the LORD your God is the one who goes with you to fight for you against your enemies to give you victory."

If a man has built a new house and has not yet dedicated it, let him go home, or he may die in battle and someone else will dedicate it. If a man has planted a vineyard and has not yet begun to enjoy its fruit, let him go home, or he may die in battle and someone else will enjoy it. If a man has become engaged to a woman and has not married her, let him go home, or he may die in battle and someone else will marry her. If anyone is afraid or fainthearted, let him go home so that his fellow soldiers will not become disheartened too.

When you approach a city to fight against it, offer it terms of peace. If it accepts and opens its gates, all the people in it shall become your forced labor and serve you. If it refuses to make peace and engages you in battle, lay siege to the city. When the LORD your God delivers it into your hand, put all the men to the sword. But take the women, children, livestock, and everything else in the city as plunder for yourselves. Use the plunder the LORD your God gives you from your enemies.

Do not destroy the trees by putting an axe to them, for you can eat their fruit. Do not cut them down. Are the trees people, that you should besiege them? Only cut down trees that you know are not fruit trees to build siege works against the city that is at war with you until it falls.

A single witness is not enough to convict someone of any crime or offense they may have committed. A matter must be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses. If a malicious witness takes the stand to accuse someone of a crime, the two people involved in the dispute must stand in the presence of the LORD before the priests and the judges who are in office at the time. The judges must make a thorough investigation, and if the witness proves to be a liar, giving false testimony against a fellow Israelite, then do to the false witness as that witness intended to do to the other party. You must purge the evil from among you. The rest of the people will hear of this and be afraid, and never again will such an evil thing be done among you. Show no pity: life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.If someone is found murdered in the land the LORD your God is giving you, and it is unknown who killed them, the elders and judges must come forward and measure the distance to the surrounding cities. The elders of the nearest city must take a heifer that has never been worked or yoked, bring it to a valley that has not been plowed or sown, and break its neck there. The Levitical priests, chosen by the LORD to serve Him and pronounce blessings, will oversee the matter. The elders of the city will wash their hands over the heifer and declare, "Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it. Forgive your people Israel, whom you have redeemed, and do not hold the guilt of innocent blood against them." This will absolve them of the bloodshed.

When you go to war and the LORD your God delivers your enemies into your hands, and you take captives, if you see a beautiful woman among them and desire her as your wife, bring her into your home. She must shave her head, trim her nails, and remove her captive's clothes. She will stay in your house and mourn her parents for a month. After that, you may marry her. If you are not pleased with her, you must let her go free and not sell her or treat her as a slave, since you have humiliated her.

If a man has two wives, one loved and the other unloved, and both bear him sons, but the firstborn is the son of the unloved wife, he must acknowledge the firstborn by giving him a double portion of his inheritance. The right of the firstborn belongs to him.

If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who does not obey his parents even after they discipline him, his parents must bring him to the city elders at the gate and say, "This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious. He will not obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard." Then all the men of the city must stone him to death. This will remove the evil from among you, and all Israel will hear and be afraid.

A man who is hanged on a tree for a sin deserving death must not be left hanging overnight. You must bury him that same day, for anyone who is hanged is under God's curse. This will prevent defiling the land the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance.If someone is found murdered in the land the LORD your God is giving you, and it is unknown who killed them, the elders and judges must come forward and measure the distance to the surrounding cities. The elders of the nearest city must take a heifer that has never been worked or yoked, bring it to a valley that has not been plowed or sown, and break its neck there. The Levitical priests, chosen by the LORD to serve Him and pronounce blessings, will oversee the matter. The elders of the city will wash their hands over the heifer and declare, "Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it. Forgive your people Israel, whom you have redeemed, and do not hold the guilt of innocent blood against them." This will absolve them of the bloodshed.

When you go to war and the LORD your God delivers your enemies into your hands, and you take captives, if you see a beautiful woman among them and desire her as your wife, bring her into your home. She must shave her head, trim her nails, and remove her captive's clothes. She will stay in your house and mourn her parents for a month. After that, you may marry her. If you are not pleased with her, you must let her go free and not sell her or treat her as a slave, since you have humiliated her.

If a man has two wives, one loved and the other unloved, and both bear him sons, but the firstborn is the son of the unloved wife, he must acknowledge the firstborn by giving him a double portion of his inheritance. The right of the firstborn belongs to him.

If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who does not obey his parents even after they discipline him, his parents must bring him to the city elders at the gate and say, "This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious. He will not obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard." Then all the men of the city must stone him to death. This will remove the evil from among you, and all Israel will hear and be afraid.

A man who is hanged on a tree for a sin deserving death must not be left hanging overnight. You must bury him that same day, for anyone who is hanged is under God's curse. This will prevent defiling the land the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance.

When you set up camp against your enemies, keep away from anything impure. If a man becomes unclean due to a nocturnal emission, he must go outside the camp and stay there. In the evening, he should bathe himself, and at sunset, he may return to the camp. Designate a place outside the camp where you can go to relieve yourself. Carry a tool with your equipment, and when you relieve yourself, dig a hole and cover your excrement. The LORD your God moves about in your camp to protect you and deliver your enemies to you. Your camp must be holy so that He will not see anything indecent among you and turn away from you.

Be careful with cases of leprosy; follow all the instructions given by the Levitical priests. Remember what the LORD your God did to Miriam on your way out of Egypt.

If you see your brother's ox or sheep straying, do not ignore it. Return it to your brother. If your brother is not nearby or you do not know who he is, take the animal home with you and keep it until your brother comes looking for it. Then return it to him. Do the same with his donkey, garment, or any lost item you find. Do not ignore it.

Do not hand over a slave who has escaped from his master to you. Let him live among you wherever he chooses, in any of your towns. Do not oppress him.

When you lend something to your neighbor, do not go into his house to get the pledge. Wait outside, and let the person to whom you are lending bring the pledge out to you. If the person is poor, do not keep the pledge overnight. Return it by sunset so that he may sleep in his cloak and bless you. This will be considered a righteous act before the LORD your God.

Do not see your brother's donkey or ox fallen on the road and ignore it. Help him lift it up.

There should be no prostitutes among the daughters of Israel or sodomites among the sons of Israel. Do not bring the earnings of a prostitute or the price of a dog into the house of the LORD your God for any vow, for both are detestable to the LORD your God.

Do not oppress a hired worker who is poor and needy, whether he is a fellow Israelite or a foreigner living in your towns. Pay him his wages each day before sunset because he is poor and depends on them. Otherwise, he may cry out to the LORD against you, and you will be guilty of sin.

A woman must not wear men's clothing, nor should a man wear women's clothing, for the LORD your God detests anyone who does this.

Do not charge interest on loans to your fellow Israelites, whether on money, food, or anything else that may earn interest. You may charge a foreigner interest, but not a fellow Israelite, so that the LORD your God may bless you in everything you do in the land you are entering to possess.

Parents are not to be put to death for their children, nor children for their parents; each will die for their own sin.

If you come across a bird's nest with chicks or eggs, and the mother is sitting on them, do not take the mother with the young. Let the mother go, but you may take the young. This will ensure your well-being and prolong your life.

When you make a vow to the LORD your God, do not delay in fulfilling it. The LORD your God will demand it from you, and you will be guilty of sin. If you refrain from making a vow, you will not be guilty. Whatever your lips utter, you must be sure to do, because you made your vow freely to the LORD your God with your own mouth.

Do not deny justice to a foreigner or an orphan, and do not take a widow's cloak as a pledge. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the LORD your God redeemed you from there. That is why I command you to do this.

When you build a new house, make a parapet around your roof to prevent anyone from falling off and bringing bloodshed on your house.

Do not plant two kinds of seed in your vineyard; if you do, not only the crops you plant but also the fruit of the vineyard will be defiled.

When you enter your neighbor's vineyard, you may eat all the grapes you want, but do not put any in your basket. When you enter your neighbor's grainfield, you may pick kernels with your hands, but do not put a sickle to their standing grain.

When you harvest your field and overlook a sheaf, do not go back to get it. Leave it for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, so that the LORD your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.

Do not plow with an ox and a donkey yoked together. Do not wear clothes of wool and linen woven together. Make tassels on the four corners of the cloak you wear.

When you beat the olives from your trees, do not go over the branches a second time. Leave what remains for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow. When you harvest the grapes in your vineyard, do not go over the vines again. Leave what remains for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt. That is why I command you to do this.

If people have a dispute, they are to take it to court, and the judges will decide the case, acquitting the innocent and condemning the guilty. If the guilty person deserves to be beaten, the judge shall make them lie down and have them flogged in his presence with the number of lashes the crime deserves, but no more than forty. If the guilty person is flogged more than that, your fellow Israelite will be degraded in your eyes.

Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.

If brothers are living together and one of them dies without a son, his widow must not marry outside the family. Her husband's brother shall take her and marry her and fulfill the duty of a brother-in-law to her. The first son she bears shall carry on the name of the dead brother so that his name will not be blotted out from Israel. If the man does not want to marry his brother's widow, she shall go to the elders at the town gate and say, "My husband's brother refuses to carry on his brother's name in Israel. He will not fulfill the duty of a brother-in-law to me." Then the elders of his town shall summon him and talk to him. If he persists in saying, "I do not want to marry her," his brother's widow shall go up to him in the presence of the elders, take off one of his sandals, spit in his face, and say, "This is what is done to the man who will not build up his brother's family line." That man's line shall be known in Israel as The Family of the Unsandaled.

Remember what the Amalekites did to you along the way when you came out of Egypt. When you were weary and worn out, they met you on your journey and attacked all who were lagging behind; they had no fear of God. When the LORD your God gives you rest from all the enemies around you in the land He is giving you to possess as an inheritance, you shall blot out the name of Amalek from under heaven. Do not forget!

If two men are fighting and the wife of one of them comes to rescue her husband from his assailant, and she reaches out and seizes him by his private parts, you shall cut off her hand. Show her no pity.

When you have entered the land the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance and have taken possession of it and settled in it, take some of the firstfruits of all that you produce from the soil of the land the LORD your God is giving you and put them in a basket.When you bring the first fruits from your land, which the LORD your God has given you, place them in a basket and go to the place the LORD chooses for His name to dwell. Approach the priest in office at that time and say, "I declare today to the LORD your God that I have come to the land the LORD swore to our ancestors to give us." The priest will take the basket from your hand and set it down in front of the altar of the LORD your God. Then you shall declare before the LORD your God: "My ancestor was a wandering Aramean who went down to Egypt and lived there, few in number, but became a great, powerful, and populous nation. The Egyptians mistreated us, oppressed us, and subjected us to harsh labor. We cried out to the LORD, the God of our ancestors, and He heard our voice, saw our misery, toil, and oppression. The LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, with great terror, signs, and wonders. He brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. Now I bring the first fruits of the soil that you, LORD, have given me." Place the basket before the LORD your God and bow down before Him. Rejoice in all the good things the LORD your God has given to you and your household, along with the Levites and the foreigners residing among you.

Do not use dishonest weights and measures. Use accurate and honest weights and measures, so that you may live long in the land the LORD your God is giving you. For the LORD detests anyone who does these things, anyone who deals dishonestly.

When you have finished setting aside a tenth of all your produce in the third year, the year of the tithe, and have given it to the Levite, the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, so that they may eat in your towns and be satisfied, declare before the LORD your God: "I have removed from my house the sacred portion and have given it to the Levite, the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, according to all you commanded. I have not turned aside from your commands nor have I forgotten any of them. I have not eaten any of the sacred portion while in mourning, nor have I removed any of it while I was unclean, nor have I offered any of it to the dead. I have obeyed the LORD my God; I have done everything you commanded me. Look down from heaven, your holy dwelling place, and bless your people Israel and the land you have given us as you promised on oath to our ancestors, a land flowing with milk and honey."

The LORD your God commands you this day to follow these decrees and laws; carefully observe them with all your heart and with all your soul. Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people: "Keep all these commands that I give you today. When you have crossed the Jordan into the land the LORD your God is giving you, set up some large stones and coat them with plaster. Write on them all the words of this law when you have crossed over to enter the land the LORD your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the LORD, the God of your ancestors, promised you."

Moses and the priests, who are Levites, said to all Israel: "Be silent, Israel, and listen! You have now become the people of the LORD your God. Obey the LORD your God and follow His commands and decrees that I give you today."

Moses commanded the people on the same day: "When you have crossed the Jordan, these tribes shall stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin. And these tribes shall stand on Mount Ebal to pronounce curses: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali. The Levites shall recite to all the people of Israel in a loud voice:

'Cursed is anyone who makes an idol—a thing detestable to the LORD, the work of skilled hands—and sets it up in secret.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who dishonors their father or mother.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who moves their neighbor's boundary stone.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who leads the blind astray on the road.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who withholds justice from the foreigner, the fatherless, or the widow.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his father's wife, for he dishonors his father's bed.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who has sexual relations with any animal.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his mother-in-law.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who kills their neighbor secretly.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who accepts a bribe to kill an innocent person.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

'Cursed is anyone who does not uphold the words of this law by carrying them out.' Then all the people shall say, 'Amen!'

If you fully obey the LORD your God and carefully follow all His commands I give you today, the LORD your God will set you high above all the nations on earth. All these blessings will come on you and accompany you if you obey the LORD your God:

You will be blessed in the city and blessed in the country. The fruit of your womb will be blessed, and the crops of your land and the young of your livestock—the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks. Your basket and your kneading trough will be blessed. You will be blessed when you come in and blessed when you go out.

The LORD will grant that the enemies who rise up against you will be defeated before you. They will come at you from one direction but flee from you in seven. The LORD will send a blessing on your barns and on everything you put your hand to. The LORD your God will bless you in the land He is giving you. The LORD will establish you as His holy people, as He promised you on oath, if you keep the commands of the LORD your God and walk in obedience to Him. Then all the peoples on earth will see that you are called by the name of the LORD, and they will fear you. The LORD will grant you abundant prosperity—in the fruit of your womb, the young of your livestock, and the crops of your ground—in the land He swore to your ancestors to give you. The LORD will open the heavens, the storehouse of His bounty, to send rain on your land in season and to bless all the work of your hands. You will lend to many nations but will borrow from none. The LORD will make you the head, not the tail. If you pay attention to the commands of the LORD your God that I give you this day and carefully follow them, you will always be at the top, never at the bottom. Do not turn aside from any of the commands I give you today, to the right or to the left, following other gods and serving them.

However, if you do not obey the LORD your God and do not carefully follow all His commands and decrees I am giving you today, all these curses will come on you and overtake you:

The LORD will afflict you with the boils of Egypt and with tumors, festering sores, and the itch, from which you cannot be cured.The LORD will strike you with painful boils, scabs, and itching that cannot be healed. You will plant many seeds in your fields but harvest little because locusts will consume your crops. You will be cursed in the city and in the countryside. Your basket and kneading trough will be cursed. The offspring of your body, the produce of your land, and the young of your livestock will be cursed. You will be cursed when you come in and when you go out.

The LORD will strike you with madness, blindness, and confusion. You will grope around at noon as a blind person gropes in the dark. You will not succeed in anything you do; you will be oppressed and robbed continually, with no one to save you. You will plant vineyards and tend them but will not drink the wine or gather the grapes because worms will eat them.

The LORD will send curses, confusion, and rebuke in everything you do until you are destroyed and perish quickly because of the evil you have done in forsaking Him. You will be engaged to a woman, but another man will sleep with her. You will build a house but not live in it. You will plant a vineyard but not enjoy its fruit. Your ox will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will not eat any of it. Your donkey will be forcibly taken from you and not returned. Your sheep will be given to your enemies, and no one will rescue them.

You will have olive trees throughout your land but will not use the oil because the olives will drop off. The LORD will afflict you with diseases until you are wiped out from the land you are entering to possess. Your sons and daughters will be given to another nation, and you will long for them all day but be powerless to help. You will have children, but they will be taken into captivity.

The LORD will strike you with wasting disease, fever, inflammation, scorching heat, drought, blight, and mildew, which will plague you until you perish. The sky over your head will be bronze, and the ground beneath you iron. A nation you do not know will eat the fruit of your land and labor, and you will be oppressed and crushed continually. You will be driven mad by what you see.

All your trees and the fruit of your land will be devoured by locusts. The LORD will turn the rain of your land into dust and powder; it will come down from the skies until you are destroyed. The LORD will strike you with painful boils from the soles of your feet to the top of your head. The foreigner living among you will rise higher and higher, while you sink lower and lower. They will lend to you, but you will not lend to them. They will be the head, and you will be the tail.

The LORD will bring a nation from far away, from the ends of the earth, like an eagle swooping down, a nation whose language you do not understand, a fierce nation that shows no respect for the old or favor to the young. They will devour the young of your livestock and the crops of your land until you are destroyed. They will besiege all the cities throughout your land until your high fortified walls fall.

You will eat the flesh of your own sons and daughters during the siege and distress your enemies will impose on you. The most gentle and sensitive man among you will begrudge his brother, the wife he loves, and the rest of his children, not giving them any of the flesh of his children that he is eating. The most gentle and sensitive woman among you will begrudge the husband she loves, her son, and her daughter, not sharing with them the afterbirth from her womb or the children she bears.

If you do not carefully follow all the words of this law, the LORD will bring upon you extraordinary plagues and severe illnesses. He will bring back upon you all the diseases of Egypt, which you dreaded, and they will cling to you. Every sickness and plague not recorded in this book of the law will the LORD bring upon you until you are destroyed. You will be left few in number, whereas you were as numerous as the stars in the sky, because you did not obey the LORD your God.

Just as the LORD took delight in making you prosper and increase in number, so He will take delight in ruining and destroying you. You will be uprooted from the land you are entering to possess. The LORD will scatter you among all nations, from one end of the earth to the other. There you will worship other gods, gods of wood and stone, which neither you nor your ancestors have known. Among those nations, you will find no repose, no resting place for the sole of your foot. The LORD will give you an anxious mind, eyes weary with longing, and a despairing heart. You will live in constant suspense, filled with dread both night and day, never sure of your life. In the morning, you will say, "If only it were evening!" and in the evening, "If only it were morning!" because of the terror that will fill your hearts and the sights you will see.

The LORD will send you back in ships to Egypt on a journey I said you should never make again. There you will offer yourselves for sale to your enemies as male and female slaves, but no one will buy you.

These are the terms of the covenant the LORD commanded Moses to make with the Israelites in Moab, in addition to the covenant He had made with them at Horeb.Moses addressed all of Israel, reminding them of the great trials and wonders they witnessed in Egypt. Despite these signs, the LORD had not yet given them the understanding to fully grasp His works. For forty years, He led them through the wilderness, ensuring their clothes and shoes did not wear out, and provided for them so they would recognize Him as their God.

Moses warned against turning away from the LORD to serve other gods, as this would bring severe consequences. He recounted how they defeated Sihon, king of Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, and took their land as an inheritance. He urged them to observe the covenant's words to prosper in all they do.

If anyone hears the words of the curse and thinks they will have peace despite their stubbornness, the LORD's anger will be kindled against them, and all the curses written in the book will fall upon them. Future generations and foreigners will see the land's devastation and ask why the LORD has done this. The answer will be because the people forsook the covenant and worshipped other gods.

However, if they return to the LORD with all their heart and soul, He will have compassion and gather them from all nations. He will bring them back to the land their ancestors possessed and bless them abundantly. The LORD will put curses on their enemies and make them prosperous if they obey His commandments.

Moses emphasized that the commandment is not too difficult or distant; it is within their reach to follow. He set before them life and good, death and evil, urging them to choose life by loving the LORD and keeping His commandments. This choice would ensure their prosperity and longevity in the land promised to their ancestors.

Moses, now 120 years old, informed the people that he could no longer lead them, and the LORD had appointed Joshua to take them into the promised land. He encouraged Joshua to be strong and courageous, assuring him that the LORD would be with him.

Moses wrote down the law and instructed it to be read every seven years during the Feast of Tabernacles so that all Israel, including children and foreigners, would learn to fear the LORD and follow His commandments. The LORD then called Moses and Joshua to the tent of meeting, where He appeared in a pillar of cloud and prepared to give Joshua his charge.Moses warned the Israelites that if they turned to foreign gods and broke the covenant, God's anger would be kindled against them. He would hide His face, and they would face many troubles, realizing that these evils came because God was not among them. Moses finished writing the law and instructed the Levites to place it beside the Ark of the Covenant as a witness against the people, knowing their rebellious nature.

Moses then commanded the Israelites to write and teach a song to their children as a witness against them when they turned to other gods after entering the promised land. He charged Joshua to be strong and courageous, assuring him that God would be with him.

Moses gathered all the elders and officers to speak these words, calling heaven and earth as witnesses. He knew that after his death, the people would become corrupt and face evil days because of their actions. Moses then recited the song to the assembly, emphasizing God's greatness, faithfulness, and justice.

He reminded them of God's care and provision, contrasting it with their unfaithfulness and idolatry. God would hide His face and bring calamities upon them for their disobedience. However, He would also judge His people and have compassion when they were left with no help.

Moses urged the people to set their hearts on his words and teach them to their children, as these words were their life and would prolong their days in the promised land. God then instructed Moses to go up Mount Nebo to see the land of Canaan, which he would not enter, and to die there, as Aaron did, because of their disobedience at the waters of Meribath-kadesh.Moses, the man of God, blessed the Israelites before his death. He said, "The LORD came from Sinai, shone from Seir, and appeared from Mount Paran with a fiery law in His right hand. He loves His people, and all His holy ones are in His care. They sit at His feet and receive His words. Moses gave us the law, an inheritance for the congregation of Jacob. There was a king in Jeshurun when the leaders of the people and the tribes of Israel gathered together.

"Let Reuben live and not die, even though his men are few. For Levi, he said, 'Your Thummim and Urim belong to your faithful one, whom you tested at Massah and contended with at the waters of Meribah. He said of his father and mother, "I do not regard them"; he did not acknowledge his brothers or his children, for they kept Your word and guarded Your covenant. They will teach Jacob Your laws and Israel Your instructions. They will offer incense before You and whole burnt offerings on Your altar. Bless his substance, LORD, and accept the work of his hands. Strike down those who rise against him and hate him, so they do not rise again.'

"For Judah, he said, 'Hear, LORD, the voice of Judah and bring him to his people. His hands will defend him, and You will be a help against his enemies.' For Benjamin, he said, 'The beloved of the LORD will dwell in safety by Him. He covers him all day long and dwells between his shoulders.'

"For Joseph, he said, 'Blessed by the LORD is his land, with the precious things of heaven, the dew, and the deep waters beneath. Blessed with the precious fruits of the sun, the rich yield of the moons, the best of the ancient mountains, and the precious things of the everlasting hills. Blessed with the precious things of the earth and its fullness, and the favor of Him who dwelt in the burning bush. Let these blessings come upon the head of Joseph, the prince among his brothers. His majesty is like a firstborn bull, and his horns are like the horns of a wild ox. With them, he will gore the peoples to the ends of the earth. These are the ten thousands of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh.'

"For Zebulun, he said, 'Rejoice, Zebulun, in your going out, and Issachar, in your tents. They will call peoples to the mountain, where they will offer righteous sacrifices. They will draw from the abundance of the seas and the hidden treasures of the sand.'

"For Gad, he said, 'Blessed is He who enlarges Gad. He lives like a lioness and tears at the arm and the crown of the head. He chose the best land for himself, where the leader's portion was reserved. He came with the heads of the people and executed the LORD's justice and His ordinances with Israel.'

"For Dan, he said, 'Dan is a lion's cub, leaping out from Bashan.' For Naphtali, he said, 'Naphtali is satisfied with favor and full of the LORD's blessing. Possess the west and the south.' For Asher, he said, 'Asher is blessed above sons. Let him be favored by his brothers and dip his foot in oil. Your bars will be iron and bronze, and your strength will last as long as your days.'

"There is no one like God, O Jeshurun, who rides the heavens to help you and in His majesty on the skies. The eternal God is your refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms. He will drive out your enemy before you and command, 'Destroy!' Israel will live in safety, Jacob's spring secure in a land of grain and new wine, where the heavens drop dew. Blessed are you, Israel! Who is like you, a people saved by the LORD? He is your shield and helper, your glorious sword. Your enemies will cower before you, and you will tread on their heights."

Moses then went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, across from Jericho. The LORD showed him all the land, from Gilead to Dan, all of Naphtali, the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, all the land of Judah as far as the Mediterranean Sea, the Negev, and the whole region from the Valley of Jericho, the City of Palms, to Zoar. The LORD said to him, "This is the land I promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, 'I will give it to your descendants.' I have let you see it with your eyes, but you will not cross over into it."

So Moses, the servant of the LORD, died there in Moab, as the LORD had said. He was buried in Moab, in the valley opposite Beth Peor, but to this day no one knows where his grave is. Moses was 120 years old when he died, yet his eyes were not weak nor his strength gone. The Israelites grieved for Moses in the plains of Moab for thirty days, until the time of weeping and mourning was over.

Joshua son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom because Moses had laid his hands on him. The Israelites listened to him and did what the LORD had commanded Moses. Since then, no prophet has risen in Israel like Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face. He did all the signs and wonders the LORD sent him to do in Egypt—to Pharaoh, to all his officials, and to his whole land. For no one has ever shown the mighty power or performed the awesome deeds that Moses did in the sight of all Israel.