Chapter 1: AL-FATIHA (THE OPENING)
Total Verses: 7
Revealed At: Mecca

1. In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
2. Praise be to God, the Lord of all the worlds;
3. The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful;
4. Master of the Day of Judgment.
5. You alone we worship, and You alone we ask for help.
6. Guide us on the straight path,
7. The path of those who have received Your grace; not the path of those who have brought down wrath upon themselves, nor of those who have gone astray.

Chapter 2: AL-BAQARA (THE COW)
Total Verses: 286
Revealed At: Medina

1. In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
2. Alif. Lam. Mim.
3. This is the Book; there is no doubt in it, a guide for those who are mindful of God;
4. Who believe in the unseen, establish prayer, and spend out of what We have provided for them;
5. And who believe in what has been revealed to you, and what was revealed before you, and have certainty in the Hereafter.
6. They are on true guidance from their Lord, and they are the successful.
7. As for those who disbelieve, it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them; they will not believe.
8. God has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and on their eyes is a veil; they will have a great punishment.
9. Among people, there are some who say, "We believe in God and the Last Day," but they do not really believe.
10. They try to deceive God and those who believe, but they only deceive themselves without realizing it.
11. In their hearts is a disease, and God has increased their disease; they will have a painful punishment because they lie.
12. When it is said to them, "Do not make mischief on the earth," they say, "We are only peacemakers."
13. Indeed, they are the ones who make mischief, but they do not realize it.
14. When it is said to them, "Believe as the others believe," they say, "Shall we believe as the fools believe?" Indeed, they are the fools, but they do not know.
15. When they meet those who believe, they say, "We believe," but when they are alone with their evil ones, they say, "We are really with you; we were only mocking."
16. God will throw back their mockery on them, and give them rope in their trespasses; so they will wander like blind ones.
17. These are the ones who have bartered guidance for error; their trade is profitless, and they have lost true direction.
18. Their example is like that of a man who kindled a fire; when it lighted all around him, God took away their light and left them in utter darkness, so they could not see.
19. Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return to the path.
20. Or like a rain-laden cloud from the sky: in it are zones of darkness, thunder, and lightning. They press their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunderclap, while they are in terror of death. But God is ever around the rejecters of faith.
21. The lightning almost snatches away their sight; every time the light helps them, they walk therein, and when the darkness grows on them, they stand still. If God willed, He could take away their faculty of hearing and seeing; for God has power over all things.
22. O people! Worship your Guardian-Lord, who created you and those who came before you, so that you may learn righteousness;
23. Who has made the earth your resting place, and the sky your canopy; and sent down rain from the heavens; and brought forth fruits for your sustenance; then do not set up rivals to God when you know the truth....as food for you. Do not set up rivals to God when you know better.

23. If you doubt what We have revealed to Our servant, then produce a chapter like it and call your witnesses besides God if you are truthful.

24. But if you cannot—and you will never be able to—then fear the Fire whose fuel is people and stones, prepared for those who reject faith.

25. Give good news to those who believe and do good deeds: they will have gardens with rivers flowing beneath them. Whenever they are given fruits from these gardens, they will say, "This is what we were given before," because they will be given similar things. They will have pure companions and will live there forever.

26. God does not shy away from using the example of a gnat or something even smaller. Those who believe know it is the truth from their Lord, but those who disbelieve say, "What does God mean by this example?" By it, He leads many astray and guides many, but He only leads astray the rebellious.

27. Those who break God's covenant after agreeing to it, and sever what God has ordered to be joined, and cause corruption on earth, are the losers.

28. How can you disbelieve in God when you were lifeless and He gave you life? Then He will cause you to die, then bring you back to life, and then you will return to Him.

29. He is the One who created everything on earth for you. Then He turned to the heavens and made them seven heavens. He has perfect knowledge of all things.

30. Remember when your Lord said to the angels, "I will place a vicegerent on earth." They said, "Will You place someone who will cause corruption and shed blood, while we praise and glorify You?" He said, "I know what you do not know."

31. He taught Adam the names of all things, then presented them to the angels and said, "Tell Me the names of these if you are truthful."

32. They said, "Glory be to You! We have no knowledge except what You have taught us. You are the All-Knowing, the All-Wise."

33. He said, "O Adam, tell them their names." When Adam told them the names, God said, "Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you reveal and what you conceal?"

34. When We said to the angels, "Prostrate before Adam," they all did, except Iblis. He refused and was arrogant, becoming one of the disbelievers.

35. We said, "O Adam, live with your wife in the Garden and eat freely from it, but do not go near this tree, or you will be among the wrongdoers."

36. But Satan made them slip and expelled them from the state they were in. We said, "Descend, as enemies to one another. On earth, you will have a place to live and provisions for a time."

37. Then Adam received words of inspiration from his Lord, and He turned to him in mercy. He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful.

38. We said, "Descend from here, all of you. When guidance comes to you from Me, whoever follows My guidance will have no fear, nor will they grieve.""Follow My guidance, and you will have no fear or grief. But those who reject faith and deny Our signs will be companions of the Fire, where they will remain forever.

O Children of Israel, remember the special favor I bestowed upon you. Fulfill your covenant with Me, and I will fulfill Mine with you. Fear only Me.

Believe in what I have revealed, confirming the scriptures you already have. Do not be the first to reject it, nor sell My signs for a small price. Fear only Me.

Do not mix truth with falsehood or conceal the truth knowingly. Be steadfast in prayer, give regular charity, and bow down with those who bow in worship.

Do you instruct others to be righteous while forgetting to practice it yourselves, even though you read the scriptures? Do you not understand?

Seek help through patience and prayer; it is difficult except for those who are humble and know they will meet their Lord and return to Him.

O Children of Israel, remember the favor I bestowed upon you and that I preferred you over all other nations. Guard yourselves against a day when no soul can help another, no intercession will be accepted, no compensation will be taken, and no one will be helped.

Remember when We delivered you from Pharaoh's people, who inflicted severe torment on you, killing your sons and sparing your women. That was a tremendous trial from your Lord.

We parted the sea for you, saved you, and drowned Pharaoh's people before your eyes. We appointed forty nights for Moses, but in his absence, you took the calf for worship and did wrong.

Even then, We forgave you so you might be grateful. We gave Moses the Scripture and the Criterion to guide you. When Moses said to his people, 'You have wronged yourselves by worshiping the calf, so repent to your Creator and kill the wrongdoers among you,' He turned to you in mercy, for He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful.

When you said, 'O Moses, we will not believe in you until we see God plainly,' you were seized by lightning as you looked on. Then We revived you after your death so you might give thanks.

We gave you shade from clouds and sent down manna and quails, saying, 'Eat of the good things We have provided for you.' But they rebelled, harming only themselves.

We said, 'Enter this town and eat freely, but enter the gate with humility and say, "Repentance." We will forgive your sins and increase the reward for those who do good.' But the wrongdoers changed the word they were given, so We sent a plague from heaven upon them for their repeated disobedience.

When Moses prayed for water for his people, We said, 'Strike the rock with your staff,' and twelve springs gushed forth. Each group knew its own place for water. Eat and drink of God's sustenance and do not commit evil or mischief on the earth."When Moses asked for water for his people, We told him to strike the rock with his staff. Twelve springs gushed out, each tribe knowing their drinking place. We said, "Eat and drink from God's provisions and do not cause corruption on the earth."

Then you said, "O Moses, we are tired of one kind of food. Ask your Lord to bring forth what the earth grows—herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions." Moses replied, "Would you exchange what is better for what is worse? Go to any town, and you will find what you want." They were covered with humiliation and misery and drew God's wrath upon themselves because they rejected His signs and killed His messengers without just cause. This was due to their disobedience and transgression.

Those who believe in the Qur'an, the Jewish scriptures, the Christians, and the Sabians—anyone who believes in God and the Last Day and does good deeds—will have their reward with their Lord. They will have no fear, nor will they grieve.

Remember when We took your covenant and raised Mount Sinai above you, saying, "Hold firmly to what We have given you and remember what is in it so that you may fear God." But you turned away afterward, and if it had not been for God's grace and mercy, you would have been among the losers.

You know about those who transgressed on the Sabbath. We said to them, "Be apes, despised and rejected." We made this an example for their time and for future generations, and a lesson for those who fear God.

When Moses said to his people, "God commands you to sacrifice a cow," they asked, "Are you making fun of us?" He replied, "I seek God's protection from being among the ignorant." They asked him to clarify what kind of cow, and he said, "It should be neither too old nor too young, but of middle age." They asked about its color, and he said, "It should be a bright yellow cow, pleasing to the eye." They asked for more details, and he said, "It should be a cow not used for plowing or watering fields, sound and without blemish." They finally agreed and sacrificed it, though they were reluctant.

Remember when you killed a man and disputed about it, but God revealed what you were hiding. We said, "Strike the body with a part of the cow." Thus, God brings the dead to life and shows you His signs so that you may understand.

Even after this, your hearts became hardened like rocks or even harder. Some rocks have rivers gushing from them, some split and release water, and some fall down in awe of God. God is not unaware of what you do.Do you hope they will believe you, knowing that some of them heard God's word and then deliberately altered it after understanding it? When they meet believers, they say, "We believe," but in private, they warn each other not to reveal what God has disclosed to them, fearing it will be used against them. Don't they realize that God knows what they conceal and what they reveal?

Some among them are illiterate and only know the scripture through hearsay, making guesses. Woe to those who write the scripture with their own hands and then claim it is from God to gain a small profit. They will face consequences for their actions and the falsehoods they spread.

They say, "The Fire will only touch us for a few days." Ask them if they have a promise from God, for He never breaks His promises, or are they saying things about God they don't know? Those who commit evil and are surrounded by their sins are companions of the Fire, where they will remain. But those who believe and do good deeds are companions of the Garden, where they will stay forever.

Remember when We took a covenant from the Children of Israel: Worship only God, be kind to parents, relatives, orphans, and the needy, speak kindly to people, establish prayer, and give charity. Yet, most of you turned away, except for a few. We also commanded you not to shed each other's blood or expel each other from your homes, and you agreed to this covenant.

However, you still kill each other and expel some from their homes, supporting each other in wrongdoing. If they come to you as captives, you ransom them, even though it was unlawful to expel them in the first place. Do you believe in part of the scripture and reject the rest? Those who do this will face disgrace in this life and severe punishment on the Day of Judgment. God is not unaware of what you do.

These are the people who trade the Hereafter for the life of this world. Their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be helped. We gave Moses the Book and sent messengers after him. We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear signs and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. Yet, whenever a messenger brought something you didn't desire, you grew arrogant, calling some liars and killing others.

They say, "Our hearts are covered." But God has cursed them for their disbelief, and only a few believe. When a Book from God came to them, confirming what they already had, they refused to believe, even though they had previously prayed for victory over disbelievers. The curse of God is on those who reject faith.They used to pray for victory over disbelievers, but when a prophet came to them with a message they didn't recognize, they rejected him. So, God's curse is on the unbelievers. 

They sold their souls for a miserable price by denying God's revelation out of envy that God would bestow His grace on whomever He pleases. They have drawn upon themselves wrath upon wrath, and a humiliating punishment awaits those who reject faith.

When told to believe in what God has sent down, they say, "We believe in what was sent to us," but they reject everything else, even if it confirms their own scriptures. Ask them, "Why did you kill God's prophets before if you truly believed?"

Moses came to you with clear signs, yet you worshipped the calf in his absence and acted wrongfully. We took a covenant from you and raised Mount Sinai above you, saying, "Hold firmly to what We have given you and listen." But you said, "We hear and we disobey," and your hearts were filled with the love of the calf because of your disbelief. Say, "Evil indeed is what your faith commands you, if you have any faith!"

Say, "If the Hereafter with God is exclusively for you and not for others, then wish for death if you are truthful." But they will never wish for it because of what their hands have sent before them. God knows the wrongdoers.

You will find them the most greedy for life, even more than idolaters. Each one wishes to live a thousand years, but even such a long life will not save them from punishment. God sees all that they do.

Say, "Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel, who brings down the revelation to your heart by God's will, confirming what came before, and as guidance and glad tidings for believers, let them know that God is an enemy to those who reject faith."

We have sent down clear signs, and only the perverse reject them. Every time they make a covenant, some of them throw it aside. Most of them do not believe.

When a messenger from God came to them, confirming what they already had, a group of them threw the Book of God behind their backs as if they did not know it.

They followed what the evil ones falsely attributed to Solomon's kingdom. Solomon did not disbelieve, but the evil ones did, teaching people magic and what was revealed to the two angels in Babylon, Harut and Marut. These angels did not teach anyone without first saying, "We are only a trial, so do not disbelieve." Yet people learned from them how to cause discord between a man and his wife. But they could not harm anyone except by God's permission. They learned what harmed them and did not benefit them. They knew that whoever engaged in such practices would have no share in the Hereafter. Evil indeed was the price for which they sold their souls, if they only knew!If they had believed and avoided evil, their reward from God would have been much better, if only they knew! 

Believers, don't use disrespectful words when addressing the Prophet. Instead, use respectful language and listen to him. For disbelievers, there is a severe punishment.

Those who disbelieve, whether from the People of the Book or the pagans, do not want any good to come to you from your Lord. But God grants His mercy to whomever He wills, for He is full of grace.

None of Our revelations do We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, but We bring something better or similar. Don't you know that God has power over all things?

Don't you know that God owns the dominion of the heavens and the earth? Besides Him, you have no guardian or helper.

Would you question your Messenger as Moses was questioned before? Whoever chooses disbelief over faith has clearly gone astray.

Many of the People of the Book wish they could turn you back to disbelief after you have believed, out of envy, even after the truth has become clear to them. But forgive and overlook until God brings about His command. God has power over all things.

Be steadfast in prayer and regular in charity. Whatever good you send forth for your souls, you will find it with God. God sees everything you do.

They say, "None shall enter Paradise unless he is a Jew or a Christian." These are their vain desires. Say, "Produce your proof if you are truthful."

No, whoever submits himself entirely to God and does good will get his reward from his Lord. They will have no fear, nor will they grieve.

The Jews say, "The Christians have nothing to stand on," and the Christians say, "The Jews have nothing to stand on," even though they both read the same Book. Those who have no knowledge say the same. God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their differences.

Who is more unjust than the one who prevents people from worshipping God in His places of worship and strives to ruin them? Such people should not enter them except in fear. They will face disgrace in this world and severe punishment in the Hereafter.

To God belong the east and the west. Wherever you turn, there is the presence of God. God is All-Pervading, All-Knowing.

They say, "God has taken a son." Glory be to Him! Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. All are subservient to Him.

He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. When He decrees a matter, He only says to it, "Be," and it is.

Those without knowledge say, "Why doesn't God speak to us or send us a sign?" People before them said similar things. Their hearts are alike. We have made the signs clear for those who firmly believe.

We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner. You will not be questioned about the companions of the blazing fire.

The Jews and the Christians will never be satisfied with you unless you follow their religion."The Jews and Christians will not be satisfied with you unless you follow their religion. Say: 'The guidance of God is the true guidance.' If you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, you will find no protector or helper against God.

Those to whom We have given the Book read it as it should be read. They are the ones who believe in it. Those who reject it are the losers.

O Children of Israel, remember the favor I bestowed upon you and that I preferred you over all others for My message.

Guard yourselves against a day when no soul will benefit another, no compensation will be accepted, no intercession will help, and no one will be aided.

Remember that Abraham was tested by his Lord with certain commands, which he fulfilled. God said, 'I will make you a leader for mankind.' Abraham asked, 'And from my offspring?' God replied, 'My promise does not include wrongdoers.'

We made the House (Kaaba) a place of assembly and safety for people. Take the station of Abraham as a place of prayer. We commanded Abraham and Ishmael to purify My House for those who walk around it, use it as a retreat, or bow and prostrate in prayer.

Abraham prayed, 'My Lord, make this a city of peace and provide its people with fruits—those who believe in God and the Last Day.' God said, 'As for those who disbelieve, I will let them enjoy for a while, then I will drive them to the torment of the Fire, an evil destination.'

When Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House, they prayed, 'Our Lord, accept this from us. You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.'

They also prayed, 'Our Lord, make us submissive to You and from our descendants a nation submissive to You. Show us our ways of worship and turn to us in mercy. You are the Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.'

'Our Lord, send among them a messenger from themselves who will recite Your signs to them, teach them the Book and wisdom, and purify them. You are the Exalted in Might, the Wise.'

Who would turn away from the religion of Abraham except someone who fools themselves? We chose him in this world, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.

When his Lord said to him, 'Submit,' he said, 'I have submitted to the Lord of the Worlds.'

This was the legacy that Abraham left to his sons, and so did Jacob: 'O my sons, God has chosen the faith for you, so do not die except as Muslims.'

Were you present when death approached Jacob? He asked his sons, 'What will you worship after me?' They replied, 'We will worship your God and the God of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, the one true God. To Him, we submit.'

That was a people who have passed away. They will reap the fruit of what they did, and you of what you do. You will not be questioned about what they used to do.

They say, 'Become Jews or Christians if you want to be guided.' Say, 'No, we follow the religion of Abraham, the upright, and he was not an idolater.'""We follow the faith of Abraham, the monotheist, who was not an idolater. Say: 'We believe in God and what was revealed to us, to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and what was given to Moses and Jesus, and to all the prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and we submit to God.'

If others believe as you do, they are rightly guided. If they turn away, they are in opposition, but God will protect you against them. He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.

Our faith is the baptism of God, and who can baptize better than God? We worship Him alone.

Say: 'Do you argue with us about God when He is our Lord and your Lord? We are responsible for our deeds, and you for yours. We are sincere in our faith in Him.'

Do you claim that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say: 'Do you know better, or does God?' Who is more unjust than one who hides the testimony they have from God? God is not unaware of what you do.

That was a people who have passed away. They will reap the fruit of what they did, and you of what you do. You will not be questioned about what they used to do.

The foolish among the people will say: 'What has turned them from the direction of prayer they used to face?' Say: 'To God belong both the East and the West. He guides whom He wills to a straight path.'

Thus, We have made you a justly balanced nation so that you may be witnesses over the nations, and the Messenger a witness over you. We appointed the direction of prayer you used to face only to test those who follow the Messenger from those who would turn back. It was a difficult test except for those whom God has guided. God would not let your faith go to waste, for He is full of kindness and mercy.

We see you turning your face towards the heavens for guidance. Now We will turn you to a direction of prayer that pleases you. Turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. Wherever you are, turn your faces in that direction. Those who have been given the Scripture know that this is the truth from their Lord. God is not unaware of what they do.

Even if you brought all the signs to the people of the Book, they would not follow your direction of prayer, nor will you follow theirs. They do not even follow each other's direction of prayer. If you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, you would be among the wrongdoers.

Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize this as they recognize their own sons, but some of them knowingly conceal the truth.

The truth is from your Lord, so do not be in doubt.

Each has a goal to which God turns them. Strive together towards all that is good. Wherever you are, God will bring you together. He has power over all things.

From wherever you start, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. This is the truth from your Lord. God is not unaware of what you do."Wherever you are, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque when you pray. This way, people will have no reason to argue against you, except those who are unjust. Do not fear them, but fear Me, so that I may complete My favor upon you and guide you.

We have sent among you a Messenger from your own people, who recites Our revelations to you, purifies you, and teaches you the Scripture and wisdom, and new knowledge.

Remember Me, and I will remember you. Be grateful to Me and do not reject faith.

O believers, seek help through patience and prayer. God is with those who patiently persevere.

Do not say of those who are killed in the way of God, "They are dead." No, they are alive, but you do not perceive it.

We will test you with fear, hunger, loss of wealth, lives, and crops. But give good news to those who patiently persevere, who say when afflicted with calamity, "To God we belong, and to Him we will return."

They are the ones who receive blessings and mercy from their Lord, and they are rightly guided.

Safa and Marwa are among the symbols of God. There is no sin for those who visit the House during the pilgrimage or at other times to go around them. Whoever does good voluntarily, God is All-Knowing and Appreciative.

Those who conceal the clear signs and guidance We have revealed, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book, are cursed by God and those entitled to curse.

Except those who repent, make amends, and openly declare the truth. To them, I turn in mercy, for I am the Most Merciful.

Those who reject faith and die rejecting it are cursed by God, the angels, and all mankind. They will abide in it; their penalty will not be lightened, nor will they be reprieved.

Your God is One God; there is no god but Him, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.

In the creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation of night and day, the sailing of ships through the ocean for the benefit of mankind, the rain God sends down to revive the earth, the animals He scatters, the changing of the winds, and the clouds between the sky and the earth, are signs for people who understand.

Yet some people take others as equals to God, loving them as they should love God. But those of faith are stronger in their love for God. If only the unrighteous could see the penalty, they would realize that all power belongs to God, and He is severe in punishment.

On that day, those who were followed will disown their followers, and they will see the penalty, and all their ties will be cut off.

Those who followed will say, "If only we had one more chance, we would disown them as they have disowned us." Thus, God will show them their deeds as regrets, and there will be no way out of the Fire for them.People will regret their actions and won't escape the Fire. 

O humanity! Eat what is lawful and good on earth, and don't follow the devil's footsteps; he is your clear enemy. He commands you to do evil and shameful deeds and to say things about God without knowledge.

When told to follow what God has revealed, they say, "We follow what our ancestors did," even if their ancestors lacked wisdom and guidance. Those who reject faith are like those who hear nothing but calls and cries; they are deaf, dumb, and blind, lacking understanding.

Believers, eat the good things provided for you and be grateful to God if you truly worship Him. God has only forbidden dead meat, blood, pork, and anything dedicated to other than God. But if someone is forced by necessity without willful disobedience, they are guiltless. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Those who conceal God's revelations for a small gain consume nothing but fire. God will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor purify them; they will face a painful punishment. They trade guidance for error and forgiveness for torment, showing boldness towards the Fire.

This is because God revealed the Book with truth, and those who dispute it are in great opposition. True righteousness is not about facing east or west, but believing in God, the Last Day, the angels, the Book, and the prophets. It is about giving wealth out of love for God to relatives, orphans, the needy, travelers, and freeing slaves. It involves maintaining prayer, giving charity, keeping promises, and being patient in adversity. These are the truthful and God-fearing.

Believers, the law of equality in cases of murder is prescribed: a free person for a free person, a slave for a slave, and a woman for a woman. If the victim's family forgives, then follow the proper procedure and compensate them kindly. This is a mercy from your Lord. Whoever exceeds this limit will face severe punishment. The law of equality saves lives, so you may restrain yourselves.

When death approaches, it is prescribed to make a fair bequest to parents and close relatives. This is a duty for the God-fearing. If anyone changes the will after hearing it, the guilt is on those who change it. God hears and knows all things. If someone fears injustice from the testator and makes peace between the parties, there is no sin on them. God is Forgiving and Merciful.If someone fears that the testator might act unjustly or disobediently, and they manage to mediate peace between the parties, there is no sin on them. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Believers, fasting is prescribed for you as it was for those before you, so you may learn self-restraint. Fast for a specific number of days, but if you are ill or traveling, make up the same number of days later. For those who can only fast with difficulty, they can feed a needy person as a ransom. However, fasting is better for you if you understand.

The month of Ramadan is when the Qur'an was revealed as guidance for humanity and clear signs for judgment. Anyone present during this month should fast, but if you are ill or traveling, make up the days later. God wants ease for you, not hardship, so you can complete the prescribed period and glorify Him for His guidance, and perhaps you will be grateful.

When My servants ask about Me, I am near. I respond to the call of the one who prays to Me. Let them respond to Me and believe in Me so they may be guided.

During the nights of fasting, it is permitted to be intimate with your spouses. They are like garments for you, and you are like garments for them. God knows you used to deceive yourselves, but He has forgiven you. So now, be intimate with them and seek what God has ordained for you. Eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct from the black thread of night, then complete the fast until nightfall. Do not be intimate with your spouses while you are in retreat in the mosques. These are the limits set by God, so do not approach them. God makes His signs clear to people so they may learn self-restraint.

Do not consume each other's property unjustly or use it to bribe judges to wrongfully consume a portion of others' property.

They ask you about the new moons. Say: They are signs to mark fixed periods of time for people and for pilgrimage. It is not righteousness to enter houses from the back; righteousness is to fear God. Enter houses through their proper doors and fear God so you may prosper.

Fight in the cause of God against those who fight you, but do not transgress limits; God does not love transgressors. Kill them wherever you find them and drive them out from where they drove you out, for persecution is worse than killing. Do not fight them at the Sacred Mosque unless they fight you there; if they fight you, then kill them. This is the reward for those who suppress faith. But if they cease, God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Fight them until there is no more persecution and religion is for God. If they cease, let there be no hostility except against the wrongdoers. The prohibited month is for the prohibited month, and for all things prohibited, there is the law of equality. If anyone transgresses against you, transgress likewise against them."Retaliate in the same way if someone attacks you, but always be mindful of God. Know that God is with those who practice self-restraint. The sacred month is for the sacred month, and for all sacred things, there is a law of retaliation. If someone acts aggressively against you, respond in kind, but be conscious of your duty to God, as He is with those who guard against evil.

Spend your wealth in the cause of God and do not lead yourselves to destruction. Do good, for God loves those who do good.

Complete the Hajj or 'Umra for God. If you are prevented from doing so, send an offering for sacrifice and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches its destination. If you are ill or have a scalp ailment, compensate by fasting, feeding the poor, or offering a sacrifice. When you are safe, if you continue 'Umra to Hajj, make an offering you can afford. If you cannot afford it, fast for three days during Hajj and seven days upon your return, making ten days in total. This applies to those whose households are not near the Sacred Mosque. Be mindful of God, for He is strict in punishment.

Hajj is during well-known months. Whoever undertakes this duty should avoid obscenity, wickedness, and quarrels. Whatever good you do, God knows it. Take provisions for the journey, but the best provision is right conduct. So fear Me, O wise ones.

It is not a sin to seek the bounty of your Lord during pilgrimage. When you descend from Mount Arafat, remember God at the Sacred Monument and praise Him as He has guided you, even though you were previously astray. Hasten onward from where the multitude hastens and ask for God's forgiveness. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

When you have completed your holy rites, celebrate God's praises as you used to celebrate your ancestors, but with greater devotion. Some people say, 'Our Lord, give us in this world,' but they will have no portion in the Hereafter. Others say, 'Our Lord, give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter, and protect us from the torment of the Fire.' They will receive a portion of what they have earned, and God is swift in reckoning.

Remember God during the appointed days. If anyone hastens to leave in two days, there is no blame on him, and if anyone stays on, there is no blame on him, provided his aim is to do right. Fear God and know that you will be gathered unto Him.

There are people whose speech about this world's life may dazzle you, and they call God to witness what is in their hearts, yet they are the most contentious of enemies. When they turn away, their aim is to spread mischief on earth and destroy crops and cattle. God does not love mischief. When it is said to them, 'Fear God,' they are led by arrogance to more crime. Hell is enough for them, an evil resting place.

There are also those who give their lives to earn the pleasure of God. God is full of kindness to His devotees."Among people, there are those who dedicate themselves to seeking God's pleasure, and God is kind to His servants.

Believers, embrace Islam fully and do not follow the devil's footsteps, for he is your clear enemy. If you turn back after receiving clear signs, know that God is powerful and wise.

Are they waiting for God to come to them in clouds with angels, and the matter to be settled? All matters return to God for judgment.

Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We sent them. If anyone changes God's favor after it has come to them, God is strict in punishment.

The life of this world is attractive to those who reject faith, and they mock believers. But the righteous will be above them on the Day of Resurrection, as God gives abundantly to whom He wills.

Humanity was once a single community, and God sent messengers with good news and warnings, and revealed the Book to judge between people in their disputes. Those who received the Book differed out of selfishness, but God guided the believers to the truth. God guides whom He wills to a straight path.

Do you think you will enter paradise without facing trials like those before you? They faced suffering and adversity, and were so shaken that even the Messenger and the believers with him asked, "When will God's help come?" Indeed, God's help is near.

They ask what they should spend in charity. Say: Whatever you spend should be for parents, relatives, orphans, the needy, and travelers. Whatever good you do, God knows it well.

Fighting is prescribed for you, though you dislike it. It may be that you dislike something good for you, and love something bad for you. God knows, and you do not.

They ask about fighting during the sacred month. Say: Fighting in it is a grave matter, but hindering people from God's path, denying Him, and expelling people from the Sacred Mosque are graver. Persecution is worse than killing. They will not stop fighting you until they turn you back from your faith if they can. Whoever turns back and dies in disbelief, their deeds will be in vain in this world and the Hereafter, and they will be companions of the Fire, abiding there forever.

Those who believe, emigrate, and strive in God's path have hope for God's mercy. God is forgiving and merciful.

They ask about wine and gambling. Say: There is great sin in both, and some benefit for people, but the sin is greater than the benefit. They ask what they should spend. Say: Spend what is beyond your needs. Thus, God makes His signs clear to you so that you may reflect.Regarding this life and the Hereafter, they ask you about orphans. Say: "The best thing to do is what benefits them. If you mix their affairs with yours, they are your brothers. God knows who intends harm and who means well. If God had wanted, He could have made things difficult for you. He is powerful and wise."

Do not marry unbelieving women until they believe. A believing slave woman is better than an unbelieving woman, even if she attracts you. Similarly, do not marry your daughters to unbelievers until they believe. A believing slave man is better than an unbeliever, even if he attracts you. Unbelievers lead you to the Fire, but God calls you to Paradise and forgiveness by His grace. He makes His signs clear so that people may remember.

They ask you about menstruation. Say: "It is a discomfort, so keep away from women during their periods and do not approach them until they are clean. When they have purified themselves, you may approach them as God has commanded. God loves those who turn to Him and those who keep themselves pure."

Your wives are like a field for you, so approach your field whenever and however you wish. But do some good for your souls beforehand and fear God. Know that you will meet Him, and give good news to the believers.

Do not use God's name in your oaths to hinder you from doing good, acting rightly, or making peace between people. God hears and knows everything.

God will not hold you accountable for unintentional oaths, but He will hold you accountable for what is in your hearts. He is forgiving and forbearing.

For those who swear to abstain from their wives, a waiting period of four months is ordained. If they return, God is forgiving and merciful. But if they decide on divorce, God hears and knows everything.

Divorced women should wait for three monthly periods before remarrying. They should not hide what God has created in their wombs if they believe in God and the Last Day. Their husbands have the right to take them back during this period if they wish for reconciliation. Women have rights similar to those of men, but men have a degree of responsibility over them. God is powerful and wise.

Divorce is permissible twice. After that, the couple should either stay together on fair terms or separate kindly. It is not lawful for men to take back any gifts given to their wives, except when both parties fear they cannot keep God's limits. If this is the case, there is no blame if the wife gives something for her freedom. These are God's limits, so do not transgress them. Those who do are wrongdoers.

If a husband divorces his wife irrevocably, he cannot remarry her until she marries another man and he divorces her. If this happens, there is no blame if they reunite, provided they can keep God's limits. These are God's limits, which He makes clear to those who understand.If a man divorces his wife, she is not allowed to remarry him until she marries another man and that marriage ends. If they both believe they can follow God's rules, they can remarry. When you divorce women and they complete their waiting period, either take them back kindly or let them go kindly. Do not take them back to harm them or take advantage of them, as this wrongs your own soul. Do not treat God's signs as a joke, but remember His blessings and the wisdom He has given you. Fear God and know that He is aware of everything.

When you divorce women and they finish their waiting period, do not prevent them from remarrying their former husbands if they agree on fair terms. This advice is for those who believe in God and the Last Day. It is better and purer for you, and God knows what you do not.

Mothers should breastfeed their children for two full years if the father wishes to complete the term. The father must provide for the mother's food and clothing fairly. No one should be burdened beyond their capacity. A mother should not be harmed because of her child, nor should a father. If both parents agree to wean the child by mutual consent, there is no blame on them. If you decide to hire a wet-nurse, there is no blame as long as you pay fairly. Fear God and know that He sees everything you do.

If any of you die and leave widows, they should wait for four months and ten days before remarrying. After this period, there is no blame if they act in a just and reasonable manner. God is well aware of what you do.

There is no blame if you hint at a proposal of marriage or keep it in your heart. God knows you will think of them. Do not make secret promises, but speak honorably and do not finalize the marriage until the waiting period is over. Know that God knows what is in your hearts, so be mindful of Him. God is forgiving and patient.

There is no blame if you divorce women before consummation or setting a dowry. Provide for them according to your means, whether you are wealthy or poor. This is a duty for those who wish to do the right thing.

If you divorce them before consummation but after setting a dowry, give them half of the agreed amount unless they or the man holding the marriage tie choose to forgo it. Forgoing is closer to righteousness. Do not forget to be generous to each other, for God sees everything you do.

Guard your prayers, especially the middle prayer, and stand before God with devotion. If you fear an enemy, pray on foot or while riding, but when you are safe, remember God in the way He has taught you.If you are in danger, you can pray on foot or on horseback. When you are safe again, remember God as He has taught you what you did not know before.

Those of you who die and leave widows should provide for them a year's maintenance and residence. If they choose to leave, there is no blame on you for what they do with themselves, as long as it is reasonable. God is powerful and wise.

For divorced women, maintenance should be provided on a reasonable scale. This is a duty for the righteous.

God makes His signs clear to you so that you may understand.

Have you not seen those who fled their homes in thousands for fear of death? God said to them, "Die," and then brought them back to life. God is full of bounty to mankind, but most people are ungrateful.

Fight in the cause of God, and know that He hears and knows everything.

Who will lend to God a goodly loan, which He will multiply many times? God gives and withholds wealth, and to Him you will return.

Have you not seen the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses? They asked a prophet among them to appoint a king so they could fight in the cause of God. The prophet asked if they would refuse to fight if commanded. They said they would fight since they were driven from their homes and families. But when fighting was prescribed, they turned back except for a few. God knows the wrongdoers.

Their prophet told them that God appointed Talut (Saul) as their king. They questioned his authority due to his lack of wealth. The prophet said God chose him and gave him knowledge and physical strength. God grants His authority to whom He pleases.

The prophet also said a sign of Talut's authority would be the return of the Ark of the Covenant, carried by angels, containing peace and relics from the families of Moses and Aaron. This would be a sign for believers.

When Talut set out with his army, he told them God would test them at a river. Those who drank from it would not be part of his army, except those who took only a sip. Most drank, except a few. When they crossed the river, they felt they couldn't face Goliath and his forces. But those who believed in meeting God said that small groups often overcome large ones with God's help. God is with the steadfast.

When they faced Goliath, they prayed for patience, firm steps, and help against the disbelievers. By God's will, they defeated them, and David killed Goliath. God gave David power, wisdom, and taught him what He willed. If God did not check some people by means of others, the earth would be full of mischief. God is full of bounty to all the worlds.If God did not balance some people against others, the earth would be corrupted. But God is kind to His creatures. By God's permission, they defeated their enemies, and David killed Goliath. God granted David kingship, wisdom, and taught him what He willed. If God did not check some people by means of others, the earth would be full of mischief. God is gracious to all.

These are the signs of God, which we recite to you in truth. You are indeed one of the messengers.

We have favored some messengers over others. To some, God spoke directly; others He raised in rank. We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear signs and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. If God had willed, the generations after them would not have fought each other after receiving clear signs. But they chose to dispute, some believing and others rejecting. If God had willed, they would not have fought, but God does what He intends.

O believers, spend from what We have provided for you before a day comes when there will be no bargaining, friendship, or intercession. Disbelievers are the wrongdoers.

God! There is no god but Him, the Living, the Eternal. Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. Who can intercede with Him except by His permission? He knows what is before and behind them, and they cannot grasp any of His knowledge except what He wills. His throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and He never tires of preserving them. He is the Most High, the Supreme.

There is no compulsion in religion. The right path is clear from the wrong. Whoever rejects false gods and believes in God has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that never breaks. God hears and knows everything.

God is the protector of those who believe. He brings them out of darkness into light. As for those who disbelieve, their patrons are false gods who lead them from light into darkness. They are the companions of the fire, where they will remain forever.

Have you not considered the one who argued with Abraham about his Lord because God had given him power? Abraham said, "My Lord is the one who gives life and death." The man said, "I give life and death." Abraham said, "God causes the sun to rise from the east, so make it rise from the west." The disbeliever was confounded. God does not guide the unjust.

Or consider the one who passed by a ruined town and wondered how God would bring it back to life. God caused him to die for a hundred years, then revived him. God asked, "How long have you been here?" He replied, "A day or part of a day." God said, "No, you have been here for a hundred years. Look at your food and drink; they have not decayed. Look at your donkey. We will make you a sign for the people. Look at the bones, how We bring them together and clothe them with flesh." When this was made clear to him, he said, "I know that God has power over all things."

When Abraham asked, "Show me, Lord, how You will raise the dead," God replied, "Do you not believe?" Abraham said, "Yes, but to reassure my heart." God said, "Take four birds, train them to come to you, then cut them into pieces and scatter them on different hills. Then call them; they will come to you swiftly. Know that God is Mighty, Wise."Abraham asked, "My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead." God replied, "Do you not believe?" Abraham said, "Yes, but I want to reassure my heart." God said, "Take four birds, train them to come to you, then place parts of them on different hills. Call them, and they will come to you quickly. Know that God is Mighty and Wise."

The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of God is like a grain of corn that grows seven ears, each with a hundred grains. God multiplies the reward for whom He wills. God is All-Encompassing and All-Knowing.

Those who spend their wealth for God's cause and do not follow their charity with reminders of their generosity or harm will have their reward with their Lord. They will have no fear, nor will they grieve.

Kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury. God is Self-Sufficient and Forbearing.

Believers, do not nullify your charity by reminders of your generosity or by causing harm, like those who spend their wealth to be seen by people and do not believe in God or the Last Day. They are like a hard, barren rock with a little soil on it; when heavy rain falls, it leaves the rock bare. They gain nothing from what they have earned. God does not guide disbelievers.

Those who spend their wealth seeking to please God and to strengthen their souls are like a garden on a fertile hill. Heavy rain makes it yield double the harvest, and even if it receives only light rain, it still produces. God sees everything you do.

Would any of you like to have a garden of date palms and vines with rivers flowing underneath, full of all kinds of fruit, but then old age strikes and your children are weak, and a fiery whirlwind destroys it? This is how God makes His signs clear to you so that you may reflect.

Believers, give from the good things you have earned and from what We have produced for you from the earth. Do not aim to give what is bad when you would not accept it yourselves unless you closed your eyes to it. Know that God is Self-Sufficient and Praiseworthy.

Satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to be stingy, while God promises you forgiveness and abundance. God is All-Encompassing and All-Knowing.

He grants wisdom to whom He wills, and whoever is granted wisdom has indeed received abundant good. But only those with understanding will remember.

Whatever you spend in charity or vow to give, God knows it all. Wrongdoers will have no helpers.

If you disclose your charity, it is good, but if you conceal it and give it to those in need, it is better for you. It will remove some of your sins. God is well aware of what you do.

It is not your responsibility to guide them, but God guides whom He wills. Whatever good you give benefits your own souls, and you should only do so seeking the "Face" of God. Whatever good you give will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged.

Charity is for those in need who are restricted in God's cause and cannot move about in the land seeking trade or work. The ignorant think they are free from want because of their modesty.Charity is meant for those who are struggling in God's cause and cannot travel for trade. People might think they are well-off because they don't beg, but you can recognize them by their modesty. Whatever good you give, God knows it well.

Those who give in charity, whether in secret or openly, day or night, will be rewarded by their Lord. They will have no fear or grief.

People who consume usury will stand like someone driven to madness by the devil. They claim that trade is like usury, but God has permitted trade and forbidden usury. Those who stop after receiving guidance from their Lord will be forgiven for the past. Their case is with God. But those who continue are companions of the Fire, where they will remain.

God removes blessings from usury but increases them for charity. He does not love the ungrateful and wicked.

Those who believe, do good deeds, establish regular prayers, and give regular charity will be rewarded by their Lord. They will have no fear or grief.

Believers, fear God and give up any remaining usury if you truly believe. If you do not, be warned of war from God and His Messenger. If you repent, you can keep your principal without interest. Do not wrong others, and you will not be wronged.

If a debtor is in difficulty, give them time until it is easy for them to repay. If you forgive the debt as charity, it is better for you if you only knew.

Fear the Day when you will be brought back to God. Every soul will be paid what it earned, and no one will be wronged.

Believers, when you deal with each other in transactions involving future obligations, write them down. Let a scribe write it faithfully between the parties. The scribe should not refuse to write as God has taught him. Let the one who incurs the liability dictate, fearing God and not diminishing anything. If the liable party is mentally deficient, weak, or unable to dictate, let their guardian dictate faithfully. Get two witnesses from your men, or one man and two women if two men are not available, so that if one forgets, the other can remind her. Witnesses should not refuse when called upon. Do not disdain writing down your contracts, whether small or large, with the time of repayment. This is more just in God's sight, more suitable as evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts. If it is a transaction carried out on the spot, there is no blame if you do not write it down. But take witnesses whenever you make a commercial contract, and let neither scribe nor witness suffer harm. If you do harm, it is wickedness in you. Fear God, for He teaches you, and He knows all things.

If you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, a pledge with possession may serve the purpose. If one of you entrusts something to another, let the trustee discharge their trust faithfully and fear God. Do not conceal evidence, for whoever does so has a sinful heart. God knows all that you do.If you are on a journey and can't find a scribe, a pledge with possession can serve the purpose. If you trust someone with something, let the trustee fulfill their duty faithfully and fear God. Do not hide evidence; whoever does so has a sinful heart, and God knows all that you do.

Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God. Whether you reveal or conceal your thoughts, God will hold you accountable. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills, for He has power over all things.

The Messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord, as do the believers. They all believe in God, His angels, His books, and His messengers, saying, "We make no distinction between any of His messengers." They say, "We hear and obey. Grant us Your forgiveness, our Lord. To You is the final return."

God does not burden any soul beyond its capacity. It will have what it has earned, and it will bear what it has done wrong. Pray: "Our Lord, do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake. Our Lord, do not place on us burdens like those You placed on those before us. Our Lord, do not impose on us what we cannot bear. Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our Protector, so help us against those who deny the truth."

Chapter 3: AL-E-IMRAN (THE FAMILY OF 'IMRAN, THE HOUSE OF 'IMRAN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

A. L. M.

God! There is no god but He, the Living, the Self-Subsisting, Eternal.

He sent down to you the Book in truth, confirming what came before it. He sent down the Law (of Moses) and the Gospel (of Jesus) as guidance for humanity, and He sent down the criterion (of judgment between right and wrong).

Those who reject faith in the signs of God will face severe punishment, for God is Exalted in Might and Lord of Retribution.

Nothing is hidden from God, whether on earth or in the heavens.

He shapes you in the wombs as He pleases. There is no god but He, the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

He sent down to you the Book with clear verses that are the foundation of the Book, and others that are allegorical. Those with perversity in their hearts follow the allegorical parts, seeking discord and hidden meanings, but no one knows their true meanings except God. Those firmly grounded in knowledge say, "We believe in the Book; the whole of it is from our Lord," and only people of understanding will grasp the message.

They pray, "Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate after You have guided us. Grant us mercy from Your presence, for You are the Grantor of bounties without measure."

"Our Lord, You will gather all humanity on a day about which there is no doubt. God never fails in His promise."

Those who reject faith, neither their possessions nor their children will help them against God. They are but fuel for the Fire.Just like the people of Pharaoh and those before them, who denied our signs, God punished them for their sins. God is strict in punishment. Tell those who reject faith that they will soon be defeated and gathered in Hell, a terrible place to be.

There was a sign for you in the two armies that met in battle: one fighting for God and the other resisting Him. The believers saw their enemies as twice their number. God supports whom He wills. This is a lesson for those who can see.

People are attracted to the love of desires: women, children, hoarded treasures of gold and silver, branded horses, cattle, and fertile land. These are the comforts of this worldly life, but with God is the best place to return to.

Say: Shall I tell you about something better than these? For those who are righteous, there are gardens with their Lord, with rivers flowing beneath, where they will live forever, with pure companions and God's pleasure. God sees His servants.

These are the ones who say, "Our Lord, we believe, so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the Fire." They are patient, truthful, obedient, and spend in charity. They pray for forgiveness in the early hours of the morning.

God bears witness that there is no god but Him, as do the angels and those with knowledge, upholding justice. There is no god but Him, the Almighty, the Wise.

The true religion with God is Islam. Those who were given the Book only differed after knowledge came to them, out of envy among themselves. Whoever denies the signs of God will find that God is swift in reckoning.

If they argue with you, say: "I have submitted myself to God, and so have those who follow me." Ask those who were given the Book and the unlearned: "Do you also submit?" If they submit, they are rightly guided, but if they turn away, your duty is only to convey the message. God sees His servants.

Those who deny the signs of God and kill the prophets unjustly, and kill those who advocate justice among people, announce to them a painful punishment. Their deeds will bear no fruit in this world or the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers.

Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the Book? They are invited to the Book of God to settle their disputes, but a group of them turns away in defiance. This is because they say, "The Fire will only touch us for a few days." Their own lies deceive them about their religion.

But how will it be when We gather them on a day about which there is no doubt, and every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned, without injustice?

Say: "O God, Lord of Power and Rule, You give power to whom You please, and You take it away from whom You please. You honor whom You please, and You bring low whom You please. In Your hand is all good. You have power over all things.""O God, Master of all power and authority! You give power to whom You will and take it away from whom You will. You honor whom You will and humble whom You will. All good is in Your hands, and You have power over everything. 

You make the night merge into the day and the day merge into the night. You bring the living out of the dead and the dead out of the living. You provide sustenance to whom You will without limit.

Believers should not take disbelievers as friends over believers. Whoever does this has no connection with God unless it is to protect themselves. God warns you to remember Him, for the final return is to Him.

Say: Whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it, God knows it all. He knows what is in the heavens and on earth, and He has power over everything.

On the Day when every soul will see all the good and evil it has done, it will wish there was a great distance between it and its evil. God warns you to remember Him, and He is kind to His servants.

Say: If you love God, follow me, and God will love you and forgive your sins. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Say: Obey God and His Messenger. If they turn away, God does not love those who reject faith.

God chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of 'Imran above all people. They were descendants of one another, and God hears and knows all things.

Remember when the wife of 'Imran said: "O my Lord! I dedicate what is in my womb to Your service. Accept it from me, for You hear and know all things." When she gave birth, she said: "O my Lord! I have given birth to a female." God knew best what she had delivered. "The male is not like the female. I have named her Mary, and I seek Your protection for her and her offspring from the Evil One."

Her Lord accepted her graciously, made her grow in purity and beauty, and assigned her to the care of Zakariya. Whenever Zakariya visited her in her chamber, he found her with sustenance. He asked: "O Mary! Where does this come from?" She replied: "It is from God. God provides sustenance to whom He pleases without measure."

There, Zakariya prayed to his Lord, saying: "O my Lord! Grant me from You a pure offspring. You hear all prayers." While he was praying, the angels called to him: "God gives you glad tidings of Yahya, who will confirm a word from God, be noble, chaste, and a prophet among the righteous."

Zakariya said: "O my Lord! How can I have a son when I am very old and my wife is barren?" The answer came: "God does what He wills."

He said: "O my Lord! Give me a sign." The answer was: "Your sign is that you will not speak to people for three days except by gestures. Remember your Lord often and glorify Him in the evening and morning."

The angels said: "O Mary! God has chosen you, purified you, and chosen you above all women of the nations. O Mary! Worship your Lord devoutly, prostrate yourself, and bow down with those who bow down.""O Mary, be devoted to your Lord, prostrate yourself, and bow with those who bow in worship."

This is part of the unseen knowledge that We reveal to you, O Messenger. You were not present when they cast lots to decide who would take care of Mary, nor were you there when they argued about it.

The angels said, "O Mary, God gives you good news of a Word from Him. His name will be Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, honored in this world and the Hereafter, and among those closest to God. He will speak to people in his infancy and adulthood and will be among the righteous."

Mary asked, "My Lord, how can I have a son when no man has touched me?" He replied, "God creates what He wills. When He decrees something, He simply says, 'Be,' and it is."

God will teach him the Book, wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel. He will be a messenger to the Children of Israel, saying, "I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. I will create for you a bird from clay, breathe into it, and it will become a bird by God's permission. I will heal the blind and the leper and bring the dead to life by God's permission. I will tell you what you eat and what you store in your houses. Surely, this is a sign for you if you believe.

I have come to confirm the Torah that came before me and to make lawful some of what was forbidden to you. I come with a sign from your Lord, so fear God and obey me. God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is the straight path."

When Jesus sensed disbelief among them, he asked, "Who will be my helpers in God's cause?" The disciples replied, "We are God's helpers. We believe in God, and bear witness that we are Muslims. Our Lord, we believe in what You have revealed and follow the Messenger, so write us among those who bear witness."

The disbelievers plotted, and God also planned. God is the best of planners. God said, "O Jesus, I will take you and raise you to Myself, purify you from those who disbelieve, and make your followers superior to the disbelievers until the Day of Resurrection. Then you will all return to Me, and I will judge between you regarding your differences.

As for those who disbelieve, I will punish them severely in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers. But those who believe and do good deeds, God will reward them fully. God does not love wrongdoers.

This is what We recite to you of the signs and the wise reminder. The likeness of Jesus before God is like that of Adam. He created him from dust and then said to him, 'Be,' and he was. This is the truth from your Lord, so do not be among those who doubt.

If anyone disputes with you about this after knowledge has come to you, say, 'Come, let us gather our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then let us pray earnestly and invoke God's curse on those who lie.'""Say: 'O People of the Book! Come to a common understanding between us: that we worship none but God, that we do not associate any partners with Him, and that none of us takes others as lords besides God.' If they turn away, then say: 'Bear witness that we are Muslims (submitting to God's will).'

O People of the Book! Why do you argue about Abraham when the Torah and the Gospel were revealed after him? Do you not understand? You argue about things you know, but why argue about things you do not know? God knows, and you do not.

Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian; he was a true believer who submitted to God, and he was not an idolater. The closest people to Abraham are those who follow him, this Prophet, and those who believe. God is the Protector of the believers.

A group among the People of the Book wishes to lead you astray, but they only lead themselves astray without realizing it. O People of the Book! Why do you reject the signs of God when you witness them? Why do you mix truth with falsehood and conceal the truth knowingly?

A group among the People of the Book says: 'Believe in the morning what is revealed to the believers, but reject it at the end of the day, so they may turn back.' They say: 'Believe only in those who follow your religion.' Say: 'True guidance is God's guidance.' They fear that a revelation similar to theirs might be sent to someone else, or that others might argue with them before their Lord. Say: 'All bounties are in God's hand; He grants them to whom He pleases. God is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.'

God selects for His mercy whom He wills. God is the Lord of great bounty. Among the People of the Book, some are trustworthy with a hoard of gold and will return it, while others, if entrusted with a single coin, will not return it unless you constantly demand it. They say: 'We have no obligation to the unlearned people.' They lie against God knowingly.

Those who keep their promises and act righteously, God loves those who act righteously. Those who sell their faith and their promises to God for a small price will have no share in the Hereafter. God will not speak to them, look at them, or purify them on the Day of Judgment. They will have a painful punishment.

Among them is a group who distort the Book with their tongues, making you think it is part of the Book when it is not. They say: 'This is from God,' but it is not from God. They knowingly lie against God."Some people distort the Book with their tongues to make you think it is from God, but it is not. They lie about God knowingly. 

It is not possible for someone who has been given the Book, wisdom, and prophethood to tell people to worship him instead of God. Instead, he would say, "Be devoted servants of the Lord because you have taught and studied the Book."

Nor would he instruct you to take angels and prophets as lords. Would he lead you to disbelief after you have submitted to God?

God made a covenant with the prophets, saying, "I give you a Book and wisdom. Then, when a messenger comes to you confirming what you have, you must believe in him and help him." They agreed, and God said, "Bear witness, and I am with you among the witnesses."

If anyone turns back after this, they are transgressors. Do they seek a religion other than God's, when everything in the heavens and earth submits to Him, willingly or unwillingly, and to Him they will return?

Say, "We believe in God and what has been revealed to us, and what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and to God we submit."

If anyone desires a religion other than Islam, it will not be accepted from them, and in the Hereafter, they will be among the losers.

How will God guide those who reject faith after accepting it and bearing witness that the Messenger is true, and after clear signs have come to them? God does not guide unjust people.

Their reward is the curse of God, His angels, and all mankind. They will dwell in it; their penalty will not be lightened, nor will they be reprieved.

Except for those who repent and make amends, for God is Forgiving, Merciful. But those who reject faith after accepting it and continue in their disbelief, their repentance will not be accepted. They are the ones who have gone astray.

Those who disbelieve and die in disbelief, even if they offered the earth full of gold as a ransom, it would not be accepted. They will have a painful punishment and no helpers.

You will not attain righteousness unless you give freely of what you love. Whatever you give, God knows it well.

All food was lawful to the Children of Israel except what Israel made unlawful for himself before the Law of Moses was revealed. Say, "Bring the Law and study it if you are truthful."

If anyone invents a lie and attributes it to God after this, they are unjust wrong-doers.

Say, "God speaks the truth. Follow the religion of Abraham, the upright one; he was not a polytheist."

The first House of worship appointed for people was at Bakka, full of blessing and guidance for all beings.The first house of worship established for humanity was at Bekka, blessed and a source of guidance for all nations. It contains clear signs, such as the Station of Abraham. Whoever enters it finds safety. Pilgrimage to this House is a duty owed to God by those who can afford the journey. If anyone denies this, know that God is independent of all creatures.

Say, "O People of the Book! Why do you reject the signs of God when He is a witness to all you do?" Say, "O People of the Scripture! Why do you obstruct those who believe from the path of God, seeking to make it crooked, while you are witnesses to God's guidance? God is not unaware of what you do."

O believers! If you listen to a faction among the People of the Book, they will turn you into disbelievers after you have believed. How can you deny faith when God's revelations are recited to you, and His Messenger is among you? Whoever holds firmly to God will be guided to the right path.

O believers! Fear God as He should be feared, and do not die except as Muslims. Hold firmly to the rope of God all together and do not be divided. Remember God's favor upon you when you were enemies, and He united your hearts so that you became brothers by His grace. You were on the brink of a pit of fire, and He saved you from it. Thus, God makes His signs clear to you so that you may be guided.

Let there arise from among you a group of people inviting to all that is good, enjoining what is right, and forbidding what is wrong. They are the ones who will be successful. Do not be like those who became divided and disputed after clear signs had come to them. For them, there is a dreadful penalty.

On the Day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be dark, it will be said to those with darkened faces, "Did you reject faith after accepting it? Taste the penalty for rejecting faith." But those with bright faces will be in God's mercy, dwelling there forever.

These are the signs of God, which we recite to you in truth. God does not wish any injustice to His creatures. To God belongs everything in the heavens and on earth, and to Him all matters return.

You are the best community raised for mankind, enjoining what is right, forbidding what is wrong, and believing in God. If the People of the Book had believed, it would have been better for them. Some of them are believers, but most of them are transgressors. They will not harm you except for a slight annoyance. If they fight you, they will turn and flee, and they will not be helped.

Shame will be upon them wherever they are found, except when they are under a covenant of protection from God and from men. They have drawn upon themselves the wrath of God, and humiliation is upon them because they rejected the signs of God and killed the prophets unjustly. This is because they disobeyed and transgressed beyond bounds.

Not all of them are alike. Among the People of the Book, there is a group that stands for the right. They recite the signs of God all night long and prostrate themselves in adoration.Not all of them are the same; among the People of the Book, there is a group that stands for what is right. They recite God's messages during the night and bow in worship. They believe in God and the Last Day, encourage what is right, and prevent what is wrong. They compete in doing good deeds and are among the righteous. Whatever good they do will not be rejected; God knows well those who do right.

As for those who reject faith, neither their wealth nor their children will help them against God. They will be companions of the Fire, dwelling there forever. What they spend in this life is like a cold wind that destroys the harvest of people who have wronged themselves. It is not God who wrongs them, but they wrong themselves.

Believers, do not take outsiders as close friends; they will not fail to corrupt you. They desire your ruin, and hatred has already appeared from their mouths. What their hearts conceal is even worse. We have made the signs clear to you if you have wisdom. You love them, but they do not love you. You believe in the entire Book, but when they meet you, they say, "We believe." When they are alone, they bite their fingers in rage against you. Say, "Perish in your rage; God knows well all the secrets of the heart."

If something good happens to you, it grieves them; but if a misfortune befalls you, they rejoice. But if you are patient and do right, their schemes will not harm you at all. God encompasses all that they do.

Remember when you left your household early to position the believers for battle, and God heard and knew all things. When two of your groups almost lost courage, God was their protector. In God, the faithful should put their trust. God helped you at Badr when you were a small, weak force. So, fear God so that you may show gratitude.

Remember when you said to the believers, "Is it not enough that God should help you with three thousand angels sent down?" Yes, if you remain firm and act rightly, even if the enemy rushes at you, your Lord will help you with five thousand angels making a terrific onslaught. God made this a message of hope for you and an assurance to your hearts. Victory comes only from God, the Exalted, the Wise.

He might cut off a portion of the disbelievers or expose them to infamy, turning them back frustrated. It is not for you to decide whether He turns in mercy to them or punishes them; they are indeed wrongdoers. To God belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. He forgives whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases; God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Believers, do not consume usury, doubling and multiplying it. Fear God so that you may prosper. Guard yourselves against the Fire prepared for disbelievers. Obey God and the Messenger so that you may obtain mercy. Be quick in the race for forgiveness from your Lord and for a Garden as wide as the heavens and the earth.Strive for forgiveness from your Lord and for a paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who are mindful of God. These are the ones who give generously in both good times and bad, who control their anger, and who forgive others. God loves those who do good.

Those who remember God and seek forgiveness after committing a sin or wronging themselves, and who do not persist in their wrongdoing, will find forgiveness from their Lord. Their reward will be gardens with rivers flowing beneath them, where they will live forever. What a great reward for those who strive to do good!

Many ways of life have passed before you. Travel the earth and see the fate of those who denied the truth. This is a clear message for humanity, a guidance and a warning for those who are mindful of God.

Do not lose heart or despair; if you are true believers, you will prevail. If you have been hurt, know that others have been hurt as well. Such days of varying fortunes are given to people so that God may know who truly believes and who does not. God does not love wrongdoers.

God's purpose is to test those who believe and to purify them, while depriving the disbelievers of blessings. Did you think you would enter paradise without God testing those of you who fought hard and remained steadfast?

Muhammad is just a messenger; many messengers have passed before him. If he dies or is killed, will you turn back on your heels? Those who turn back will not harm God in the least, but God will reward those who are grateful.

No soul can die except by God's permission and at a predetermined time. Whoever desires the reward of this world will receive it, and whoever desires the reward of the Hereafter will receive it. God will reward those who are grateful.

Many prophets fought alongside godly men who did not lose heart despite facing adversity. They remained steadfast, and God loves those who are firm and patient. Their only prayer was, "Our Lord, forgive us our sins and our excesses, make our steps firm, and help us against those who disbelieve."

God gave them a reward in this world and an even better reward in the Hereafter. God loves those who do good.

Believers, if you obey the disbelievers, they will turn you back on your heels, and you will become losers. But God is your protector, and He is the best of helpers.

We will cast terror into the hearts of the disbelievers because they associate partners with God, for which He has sent no authority. Their abode will be the Fire, and it is an evil home for the wrongdoers.

God fulfilled His promise to you when you were about to annihilate your enemy with His permission, until you faltered and disputed the order, disobeying after He showed you what you desired. Among you are those who desire this world and those who desire the Hereafter. Then He diverted you...God tested you by making you retreat from your enemies, but He forgave you because He is gracious to those who believe. When you were about to defeat your enemies with God's permission, you faltered, argued, and disobeyed after seeing what you desired. Some of you wanted worldly gains, while others sought the Hereafter. God made you retreat to test you, but He has forgiven you. God is kind to believers.

When you were climbing the hill, ignoring the Messenger's call from behind, God gave you distress upon distress to teach you not to grieve over what you lost or what happened to you. God knows everything you do.

After the distress, God sent down calmness, making some of you feel sleepy while others were anxious and doubted God. They questioned their situation, but the matter is entirely in God's hands. They hid their thoughts, saying if they had any control, they wouldn't have been killed. Tell them that even if they stayed home, those destined to die would still go to their death. This was to test and purify your hearts. God knows what is in your hearts.

Those who turned back on the day the two armies met were influenced by Satan because of their past deeds, but God has forgiven them. God is forgiving and patient.

Believers, don't be like the disbelievers who say about their brothers who travel or fight, "If they had stayed with us, they wouldn't have died or been killed." God makes this a cause of regret in their hearts. God gives life and death and sees everything you do.

If you die or are killed in God's way, His forgiveness and mercy are far better than anything you could amass. Whether you die or are killed, you will be gathered to God.

It is by God's mercy that you deal gently with people. If you were harsh, they would have left you. So forgive them, ask for God's forgiveness for them, and consult them in important matters. Once you decide, trust in God. God loves those who trust in Him.

If God helps you, no one can defeat you. If He forsakes you, who can help you? Believers should rely on God.

No prophet could ever be unfaithful. Anyone who is unfaithful will bring what they misappropriated on the Day of Judgment, and everyone will be fully repaid for what they earned without injustice.

Is the one who seeks God's pleasure the same as the one who incurs His wrath and ends up in Hell? They are not equal. There are different levels in God's sight, and He sees everything they do.

God did a great favor to the believers by sending a messenger from among themselves, reciting God's signs, purifying them, and teaching them.God has shown great kindness to the believers by sending them a messenger from among themselves. This messenger recites God's revelations, purifies them, and teaches them the Scripture and wisdom. Before this, they were clearly in error.

When a disaster struck you, even though you had inflicted twice as much damage on your enemies, you asked, "Why did this happen?" Say, "It is from yourselves. God has power over all things."

What you suffered on the day the two armies met was by God's permission, to test the believers and to expose the hypocrites. These hypocrites were told, "Come, fight in God's way or at least defend yourselves." They replied, "If we knew how to fight, we would follow you." On that day, they were closer to disbelief than to faith. They said with their mouths what was not in their hearts, but God knows what they conceal.

Those who stayed behind said of their brothers who were fighting, "If they had listened to us, they would not have been killed." Say, "Then avert death from yourselves if you are truthful."

Do not think of those who are killed in God's way as dead. They are alive, provided for by their Lord. They rejoice in what God has given them and are happy for those who have not yet joined them, knowing they have no reason to fear or grieve. They celebrate God's grace and bounty, knowing that God does not let the reward of the believers go to waste.

Those who responded to God's call and the Messenger's call, even after being wounded, will have a great reward if they do right and avoid wrong. When people told them, "A great army is gathering against you," it only increased their faith. They said, "God is sufficient for us. He is the best disposer of affairs."

They returned with grace and bounty from God, unharmed, because they followed God's pleasure. God is the Lord of infinite bounty. It is only Satan who tries to make you fear his followers. Do not fear them; fear Me if you are true believers.

Do not let those who rush into disbelief grieve you. They cannot harm God at all. God will not give them any portion in the Hereafter, and they will face severe punishment. Those who trade faith for disbelief will not harm God, but they will have a painful punishment.

Do not think that the respite given to disbelievers is good for them. It is only to let them increase in sin, and they will have a shameful punishment. God will not leave the believers in their current state until He separates the wicked from the good. He does not reveal the secrets of the unseen to everyone, but He chooses messengers for this purpose. So believe in God and His messengers. If you believe and do right, you will have a great reward.

Those who withhold the gifts God has given them should not think it is good for them. It will be worse for them. On the Day of Judgment, what they withheld will be like a twisted collar around their necks. To God belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth.God is fully aware of everything you do. Those who hoard the blessings God has given them should not think it is good for them. In fact, it will be worse for them. What they hoard will become a burden around their necks on the Day of Resurrection. God owns the heavens and the earth and knows all your actions.

God has heard the taunts of those who say, "God is poor, and we are rich!" We will record their words and their wrongful killing of the prophets, and we will say, "Taste the penalty of the Scorching Fire!" This punishment is because of the deeds you have committed. God does not wrong His servants.

They also said, "God took our promise not to believe in any messenger unless he showed us a sacrifice consumed by fire from heaven." Say, "Messengers before me came with clear signs and even with what you asked for. Why then did you kill them if you are truthful?"

If they reject you, remember that messengers before you were also rejected, even though they came with clear signs, scriptures, and the Book of Enlightenment. Every soul will taste death, and on the Day of Judgment, you will be fully compensated for your deeds. Those who are saved from the Fire and admitted to Paradise have truly succeeded. The life of this world is just an illusion.

You will certainly be tested in your possessions and yourselves, and you will hear much that will grieve you from those who received the Book before you and from those who worship many gods. But if you persevere patiently and guard against evil, that will be a determining factor in all affairs.

Remember, God took a covenant from the People of the Book to make His message known and clear to mankind and not to hide it. But they threw it away and traded it for a small gain. What a terrible bargain they made!

Do not think that those who rejoice in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done will escape the penalty. They will face a grievous punishment. To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and He has power over all things.

In the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of night and day, there are signs for those who understand. These are the people who remember God while standing, sitting, and lying down, and who reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth. They say, "Our Lord, You did not create this in vain. Glory to You! Save us from the penalty of the Fire."

"Our Lord, anyone You admit to the Fire is covered with shame, and wrongdoers will have no helpers. Our Lord, we have heard the call to faith and we have believed. Forgive us our sins, blot out our iniquities, and take our souls in the company of the righteous."

"Our Lord, grant us what You promised through Your messengers and save us from shame on the Day of Judgment. You never break Your promise."

Their Lord has accepted their prayers and answered them: "I will not let the work of any of you go to waste, whether male or female. You are all equal. Those who have left their homes, been driven out, suffered harm in My cause, fought, or been slain, I will blot out their iniquities and admit them into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath. This is a reward from God."God has heard their prayers and said, "I will not let the efforts of any worker, male or female, go to waste. You are all equal. Those who fled their homes, were driven out, suffered harm for My cause, fought, and were killed, I will erase their sins and admit them into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath. This is a reward from God, and with God is the best of rewards."

Do not be deceived by the apparent success of those who disbelieve. Their enjoyment is brief, and their ultimate abode is Hell, a terrible place to rest. On the other hand, those who fear their Lord will have Gardens with rivers flowing beneath, where they will live forever. This is a gift from God, and what God has in store is better for the righteous.

Among the People of the Book, there are those who believe in God and the revelations given to you and to them. They humble themselves before God and do not trade God's signs for a small gain. Their reward is with their Lord, and God is swift in accounting.

Believers, be patient, persevere, strengthen each other, and fear God so that you may succeed.

Chapter 4: AN-NISA (WOMEN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

O mankind, be mindful of your Lord, who created you from a single soul and from it created its mate, and from them spread countless men and women. Be mindful of God, through whom you demand your mutual rights, and respect the wombs that bore you. God is always watching over you.

Give orphans their property when they reach maturity. Do not substitute worthless things for their good ones, and do not consume their wealth by mixing it with your own. This is a great sin.

If you fear you cannot treat orphans fairly, then marry women of your choice, two, three, or four. But if you fear you cannot be just, then marry only one or what your right hands possess. This will help you avoid injustice.

Give women their dowries as a free gift, but if they willingly give up part of it, you may enjoy it with a clear conscience.

Do not give your property, which God has made a means of support, to those weak of understanding. Instead, feed and clothe them from it and speak to them kindly and justly.

Test orphans until they reach marriageable age. If you find them mature, hand over their property to them. Do not consume it wastefully or in haste before they grow up. If the guardian is well-off, let him claim no remuneration, but if he is poor, let him take what is just and reasonable. When you release their property to them, take witnesses in their presence. God is sufficient as a Reckoner.

Men and women both have a share in what parents and close relatives leave behind, whether the property is small or large. This is a determined share.

If other relatives, orphans, or the poor are present at the time of division, provide for them and speak to them kindly and justly.Let those who manage an estate have the same concern as if they had left behind a vulnerable family. They should fear God and speak words of comfort. Those who unjustly consume the property of orphans are essentially consuming fire into their bodies and will face a blazing fire.

God instructs you regarding your children's inheritance: a son receives a share equal to that of two daughters. If there are only daughters, two or more, they receive two-thirds of the inheritance; if only one, she gets half. Each parent receives a sixth if the deceased left children; if no children, the mother gets a third, unless there are siblings, in which case she gets a sixth. These portions are determined by God, who is all-knowing and wise.

For what your wives leave, you get half if they have no children; if they have children, you get a fourth. Similarly, they get a fourth of what you leave if you have no children; if you have children, they get an eighth. If a person leaves no direct heirs but has siblings, each sibling gets a sixth; if more than two, they share a third. These are God's commands, and He is all-knowing and forbearing.

Those who obey God and His Messenger will be admitted to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath, living there forever. This is the ultimate success. But those who disobey God and His Messenger and overstep His limits will be admitted to a fire, where they will remain, facing a humiliating punishment.

If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, take the evidence of four reliable witnesses against them. If they testify, confine the women to their houses until death claims them or God provides another way. If two men among you are guilty of lewdness, punish them both. If they repent and amend, leave them alone, for God is forgiving and merciful.

God accepts the repentance of those who do wrong out of ignorance and then quickly repent. For them, God is merciful and wise. However, repentance is not accepted from those who continue to do evil until death approaches and they say, "Now I repent," nor from those who die as disbelievers. For them, a grievous punishment is prepared.

Believers, you are forbidden to inherit women against their will. Do not treat them harshly to take away part of the dowry you have given them, except in cases of open lewdness. Instead, live with them kindly and justly. If you dislike them, it may be that you dislike something in which God has placed much good.Treat your wives kindly, even if you dislike them, as there may be hidden good in what you dislike. Believers, you cannot inherit women against their will or treat them harshly to reclaim part of their dowry, unless they are guilty of clear indecency. If you wish to replace one wife with another, do not take back any part of the dowry you gave, even if it was a large amount. How could you take it back after you have been intimate and made a solemn promise to each other?

Do not marry women whom your fathers married, as this is shameful and detestable. Forbidden to you in marriage are your mothers, daughters, sisters, aunts, nieces, foster-mothers, foster-sisters, mothers-in-law, step-daughters (if you have consummated the marriage with their mothers), daughters-in-law, and having two sisters as wives at the same time. Also prohibited are married women, except those captured in war. These are God's commands.

If you cannot afford to marry free believing women, you may marry believing maidens among your captives. Marry them with the permission of their owners and give them a fair dowry. They should be chaste and not promiscuous. If they commit indecency after marriage, their punishment is half that of free women. This is for those who fear sin, but it is better to practice self-restraint. God is forgiving and merciful.

God wishes to make things clear to you, guide you by the examples of those before you, and turn to you in mercy. Those who follow their desires want you to deviate greatly. God wants to lighten your burdens, as humans are created weak.

Believers, do not consume each other's property unjustly, but trade by mutual consent. Do not kill yourselves, for God is merciful to you. Whoever does this out of aggression and injustice will be cast into the fire. If you avoid major sins, God will forgive your minor sins and admit you to a place of honor. Do not covet what God has given to some more than others. Men and women will each be rewarded for what they earn. Ask God for His bounty.Do not envy what others have been given by God. Men and women will each be rewarded for what they earn. Ask God for His grace, as He knows everything. 

Everyone has been given a share of inheritance from parents and relatives. Honor agreements and give people their due, as God is a witness to all things.

Men are protectors of women because God has given them more strength and they support women financially. Good women are obedient and guard what God wants them to guard. If you fear disloyalty from your wives, first advise them, then refuse to share their beds, and as a last resort, discipline them lightly. If they return to obedience, do not seek ways to harm them, as God is Most High and Great.

If you fear a breach between a couple, appoint an arbiter from each family. If they seek peace, God will help them reconcile, as He knows everything.

Worship God and do not associate anything with Him. Be kind to parents, relatives, orphans, the needy, neighbors, travelers, and those under your care. God does not love the arrogant and boastful.

Do not be stingy or encourage others to be stingy, and do not hide the bounties God has given you. For those who resist faith, there is a shameful punishment.

Those who spend their wealth to show off and do not believe in God or the Last Day are taking Satan as a companion, and he is a terrible companion.

What harm would it have done them to believe in God and the Last Day and spend from what God has given them? God knows them well.

God is never unjust, even in the smallest measure. If there is any good done, He will double it and give a great reward from His presence.

On the Day of Judgment, every people will have a witness, and you, Muhammad, will be a witness against these people. Those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish they were level with the ground, but they cannot hide anything from God.

Believers, do not approach prayers while intoxicated until you understand what you are saying, nor in a state of ceremonial impurity unless you are traveling. If you are ill, on a journey, or have used the restroom, or have been in contact with women and cannot find water, use clean sand or earth to cleanse yourselves. God is forgiving and merciful.

Have you seen those who were given a portion of the Book? They trade in error and wish for you to lose the right path. God knows your enemies best and is sufficient as a protector and helper.

Some Jews distort words from their proper places and say, "We hear and we disobey," twisting their tongues and slandering faith. If they had said, "We hear and we obey," it would have been better for them. But God has cursed them for their disbelief, and only a few of them will believe.Some Jews distort words from their context and say, "We hear and disobey," and "Listen to us!" twisting their tongues and mocking religion. If they had said, "We hear and we obey," it would have been better for them. But God has cursed them for their disbelief, so only a few believe.

People of the Book, believe in what We have revealed, confirming what you already have, before We change your faces beyond recognition or curse you as We cursed the Sabbath-breakers. God's command is always executed.

God does not forgive associating partners with Him, but He forgives anything else to whom He pleases. Associating partners with God is a grave sin.

Have you seen those who claim to be pure? God purifies whom He wills, and they will not be wronged even a little.

See how they invent lies about God! That itself is a clear sin.

Have you seen those who were given a portion of the Book? They believe in sorcery and evil and say to the unbelievers that they are better guided than the believers.

These are the ones whom God has cursed, and you will not find any helper for them.

Do they have a share in dominion or power? If they did, they would not give people even a speck.

Are they jealous of what God has given people out of His bounty? We had already given the people of Abraham the Book and wisdom and conferred upon them a great kingdom.

Some of them believed, and some turned away. Hell is sufficient for their burning.

Those who reject Our signs will be cast into the Fire. As often as their skins are roasted, We will replace them with fresh skins so they may taste the punishment. God is Mighty and Wise.

But those who believe and do righteous deeds will be admitted to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath, where they will have pure companions and will dwell in cool, deep shade.

God commands you to return trusts to their rightful owners and to judge with justice. How excellent is the teaching He gives you! God hears and sees all things.

Believers, obey God, His Messenger, and those in authority among you. If you disagree on anything, refer it to God and His Messenger if you believe in God and the Last Day. That is best and most suitable for final determination.

Have you seen those who claim to believe in what was revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They wish to resort to false deities for judgment, even though they were commanded to reject them. Satan wishes to lead them far astray.

When it is said to them, "Come to what God has revealed and to the Messenger," you see the hypocrites turn away in aversion.

How will it be when misfortune befalls them because of what their hands have done? Then they come to you, swearing by God, "We meant no more than good-will and conciliation!"When misfortune strikes them because of their actions, they come to you swearing by God that they only intended good and harmony. God knows what is in their hearts, so avoid them, but advise them and speak to them in a way that reaches their souls.

We sent messengers to be obeyed according to God's will. If they had come to you when they wronged themselves and asked for God's forgiveness, and if the Messenger had also asked for their forgiveness, they would have found God to be forgiving and merciful.

But no, by your Lord, they will not truly believe until they accept your judgment in their disputes and find no resistance in their hearts to your decisions, fully submitting to them.

If We had commanded them to sacrifice their lives or leave their homes, only a few would have done it. But if they had done what they were instructed, it would have been better for them and strengthened their faith. We would have given them a great reward and guided them to the straight path.

Those who obey God and the Messenger will be with those whom God has blessed: the prophets, the truthful, the martyrs, and the righteous. What a beautiful fellowship! This is a bounty from God, and God is all-knowing.

Believers, take your precautions and either go forth in groups or all together. Among you, there are those who hesitate. If a misfortune befalls you, they say, "God favored us by not being present with them." But if good fortune comes to you from God, they say, "Oh, I wish I had been with them; I would have achieved great success!"

Let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of God. Whether they are slain or victorious, We will give them a great reward. Why should you not fight in the cause of God and for the oppressed men, women, and children who cry out, "Our Lord, rescue us from this town of oppressors and send us a protector and helper!"

Those who believe fight in the cause of God, while those who disbelieve fight in the cause of evil. So fight against the allies of Satan, for Satan's strategy is weak.

Have you not seen those who were told to hold back their hands from fighting, establish regular prayers, and give charity? But when fighting was prescribed for them, a group of them feared people as they should have feared God, or even more. They said, "Our Lord, why have you ordained fighting for us? Could you not delay it for a while?" Say, "The enjoyment of this world is brief; the hereafter is better for those who do right, and you will not be wronged even a little."

Wherever you are, death will find you, even if you are in fortified towers. If good befalls them, they say, "This is from God." But if evil befalls them, they say, "This is from you, O Prophet." Say, "All things are from God." What is wrong with these people that they fail to understand a single fact?No matter where you are, death will find you, even if you are in fortified towers. When good things happen, they say, "This is from God." But when bad things happen, they blame you, Prophet. Tell them, "Everything is from God." Why don't these people understand this simple truth?

Whatever good happens to you is from God, but whatever bad happens is because of your own actions. We have sent you, Prophet, as a messenger to guide humanity, and God is enough as a witness.

Whoever obeys the Messenger obeys God. If anyone turns away, remember, we haven't sent you to watch over their deeds.

They say they will obey, but when they leave you, some of them plan things that are different from what you said. God knows what they plan at night. So, avoid them and trust in God. God is enough as a protector.

Don't they reflect on the Quran? If it were from anyone other than God, they would have found many contradictions in it.

When they hear news about safety or fear, they spread it without thinking. If they had referred it to the Messenger or those in authority, the truth would have been clear. If it weren't for God's grace and mercy, most of you would have followed Satan.

So, fight in God's cause. You are responsible only for yourself. Encourage the believers to fight. Maybe God will restrain the disbelievers' power. God is the strongest in might and punishment.

Whoever supports a good cause will share in its reward, and whoever supports an evil cause will share in its burden. God has power over everything.

When you are greeted, respond with a better greeting or at least an equal one. God keeps account of everything.

God is the only God. He will gather you all on the Day of Judgment, about which there is no doubt. Who is more truthful than God?

Why are you divided into two groups about the hypocrites? God has cast them back because of their deeds. Do you want to guide those whom God has led astray? You can't find a way for those whom God has led astray.

They wish you would disbelieve as they do so you would be the same as them. Don't take them as friends until they leave their homes for God's cause. If they turn back to enmity, seize them and kill them wherever you find them. Don't take them as friends or helpers.

Except those who seek refuge with people you have a treaty with, or those who come to you with hearts restraining them from fighting you or their own people. If God had willed, He could have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. If they withdraw and offer you peace, God allows you no way against them.

You will find others who want security from you and their own people. Whenever they are tempted, they fall into it. If they don't withdraw from you or offer you peace, seize them and kill them wherever you find them. In this case, We have given you a clear argument against them.If they don't keep away from you, offer peace, or hold back their hands, then capture and kill them wherever you find them. We have given you clear authority against such people. 

You will find others who want to be safe from you and their own people. Whenever they are tempted, they fall into mischief. If they don't withdraw from you, offer peace, or restrain their hands, then capture and kill them wherever you find them. We have given you clear authority against them.

A believer should never kill another believer, except by mistake. If someone kills a believer by mistake, they must free a believing slave and pay compensation to the deceased's family, unless the family forgives it. If the deceased belonged to a people at war with you and was a believer, freeing a believing slave is enough. If the deceased belonged to a people with whom you have a treaty, compensation should be paid to the family and a believing slave should be freed. If someone cannot afford this, they must fast for two consecutive months as repentance to God. God is all-knowing and wise.

If someone intentionally kills a believer, their punishment is Hell, where they will stay forever. God's wrath and curse are upon them, and a dreadful penalty is prepared for them.

Believers, when you go out in the cause of God, investigate carefully and do not say to anyone who offers you peace, "You are not a believer," seeking the temporary goods of this life. With God, there are abundant gains. You were like this before, but God has been gracious to you. So, investigate carefully. God is well aware of all that you do.

Not equal are those believers who sit at home and those who strive and fight in the cause of God with their goods and their persons. God has granted a higher grade to those who strive and fight with their goods and persons than to those who sit at home. God has promised good to all believers, but He has given a special reward to those who strive and fight.

These ranks, forgiveness, and mercy are specially bestowed by Him. God is oft-forgiving, most merciful.

When angels take the souls of those who die in sin against themselves, they ask, "What was your condition?" They reply, "We were weak and oppressed in the land." The angels say, "Wasn't God's earth spacious enough for you to migrate?" Such people will find their abode in Hell, an evil refuge.

Except for those who are truly weak and oppressed—men, women, and children—who have no means or guide to their way. For these, there is hope that God will forgive them. God is forgiving and merciful.

Whoever leaves their home in the cause of God will find many places of refuge and abundance on earth. If they die as a refugee for God and His Messenger, their reward is due with God. God is oft-forgiving, most merciful.

When you travel through the earth, there is no blame on you if you shorten your prayers, fearing that unbelievers may attack you. The unbelievers are your open enemies.

When you, O Messenger, are with them and lead them in prayer, let one party of them stand up in prayer with you, taking their arms with them. When they finish their prostrations, let them take their position in the rear. Let the other party come up, which has not yet prayed, and let them pray with you, taking all precautions and bearing arms. The unbelievers wish that you would be negligent of your arms and baggage so they could assault you in a single rush. There is no blame on you if you put away your arms because of the inconvenience of rain or because you are ill, but take every precaution for yourselves. God has prepared a humiliating punishment for the unbelievers.When you finish the prayer, remember God while standing, sitting, or lying down. Once you are safe, establish regular prayers, as they are prescribed for believers at specific times.

Do not hesitate to pursue the enemy. If you are suffering, they are suffering too, but you have hope from God, which they do not. God is all-knowing and wise.

We have revealed the Book to you in truth so you can judge between people as guided by God. Do not advocate for those who betray their trust. Seek God's forgiveness, for He is forgiving and merciful.

Do not defend those who deceive themselves. God does not love the treacherous and sinful. They may hide their crimes from people, but they cannot hide from God, who is with them when they plot at night. God encompasses all they do.

You may defend them in this world, but who will defend them before God on the Day of Judgment? If anyone does wrong and then seeks God's forgiveness, they will find God forgiving and merciful. Whoever commits a sin does so against their own soul. God is all-knowing and wise.

If someone commits a fault or sin and blames an innocent person, they carry a burden of falsehood and a flagrant sin. If it were not for God's grace and mercy, a group of them would have misled you, but they only mislead themselves and cannot harm you. God has revealed the Book and wisdom to you and taught you what you did not know. His grace upon you is immense.

Most of their secret talks are not beneficial, except for those who encourage charity, goodness, or reconciliation. Whoever does this seeking God's pleasure will receive a great reward. If anyone opposes the Messenger after guidance has been made clear and follows a path other than that of the believers, We will leave them on their chosen path and lead them to Hell, a terrible destination.

God does not forgive associating others with Him, but He forgives other sins for whom He wills. Whoever associates others with God has strayed far. They call upon female deities and Satan, the persistent rebel. God cursed him, and he said, "I will take a portion of Your servants and mislead them, arouse desires in them, command them to slit the ears of cattle, and alter God's creation." Whoever takes Satan as a friend instead of God is a clear loser.Satan promises them and stirs up false desires, but his promises are nothing but deception. Those who follow him will end up in Hell, with no escape. However, those who believe and do good deeds will be admitted to gardens with rivers flowing beneath, where they will live forever. This is God's true promise, and no one is more truthful than Him.

Your desires or those of the People of the Book won't prevail. Whoever does evil will be repaid accordingly and will find no protector or helper besides God. But those who do good deeds, whether male or female, and have faith, will enter Heaven and will not be wronged in the least.

Who can be better in religion than one who submits to God, does good, and follows the way of Abraham, whom God took as a friend? Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God, and He encompasses all things.

They ask for guidance concerning women. Say: God instructs you about them, especially regarding female orphans to whom you do not give the prescribed portions and whom you desire to marry, and concerning weak children. Stand firm for justice to orphans. God is aware of all the good you do.

If a wife fears cruelty or desertion from her husband, there is no blame if they arrange an amicable settlement. Such a settlement is best, even though men's souls are swayed by greed. But if you do good and practice self-restraint, God is well-acquainted with all that you do.

You will never be able to be completely fair between your wives, even if you desire it. But do not turn away from one altogether, leaving her in suspense. If you come to a friendly understanding and practice self-restraint, God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

If they must part, God will provide abundance for all from His bounty. God cares for all and is Wise. Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God. We have directed the People of the Book before you, and you, to fear God. If you deny Him, everything still belongs to God, and He is free of all wants, worthy of all praise.

If He wills, He can destroy you and create another race, for He has the power to do so. Whoever desires a reward in this life should know that God has the reward of both this life and the hereafter. God hears and sees all things.

O believers, stand firmly for justice as witnesses to God, even if it is against yourselves, your parents, or your kin, whether rich or poor. God can best protect both. Do not follow your desires, lest you swerve from justice. If you distort or decline to do justice, God is well-acquainted with all that you do.If you falter or stray, know that God is always aware of your actions. 

Believers, uphold justice and bear witness for God, even if it is against yourselves, your parents, or close relatives. Whether the person is rich or poor, God is closer to them in compassion. Do not follow your desires, as they may lead you away from justice. If you deviate or turn aside, God is fully aware of what you do.

Believers, have faith in God, His Messenger, and the scriptures He has sent down to His Messenger and those before him. Anyone who denies God, His angels, His Books, His Messengers, and the Day of Judgment has gone far astray.

Those who believe, then reject faith, then believe again and again reject faith, and continue to increase in disbelief, God will not forgive them nor guide them on the right path.

Warn the hypocrites of a severe penalty. They seek honor from disbelievers rather than believers, but all honor belongs to God. When you hear God's signs being denied and ridiculed, do not sit with those who do so until they change the subject. Otherwise, you would be like them. God will gather the hypocrites and disbelievers together in Hell.

These hypocrites wait and watch you. If you gain a victory from God, they say, "Were we not with you?" But if the disbelievers succeed, they say, "Did we not gain an advantage over you and protect you from the believers?" God will judge between you on the Day of Judgment, and He will not grant the disbelievers a way to triumph over the believers.

The hypocrites think they can deceive God, but He will outsmart them. When they stand up for prayer, they do so lazily, only to be seen by people, and they remember God but little. They waver between belief and disbelief, belonging neither to one group nor the other. Those whom God leads astray will not find a way.

Believers, do not take disbelievers as friends instead of believers. Do you wish to offer God a clear proof against yourselves? The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire, and you will find no helper for them, except those who repent, mend their ways, hold fast to God, and purify their religion for God. They will be with the believers, and God will grant the believers a great reward.

What does God gain by punishing you if you are grateful and believe? God is always responsive and aware. He does not love the public utterance of hurtful speech unless it is by someone who has been wronged. God hears and knows all things. If you do good openly or secretly, or forgive an evil, God is forgiving and powerful.

Those who deny God and His messengers and seek to make a distinction between God and His messengers, saying, "We believe in some but reject others," and wish to take a middle course, are truly disbelievers. We have prepared a humiliating punishment for them. But those who believe in God and His messengers and make no distinction between any of them, God will give them their due rewards. God is forgiving and merciful.The People of the Book ask you to bring down a book from heaven. They asked Moses for an even greater miracle, saying, "Show us God in public." They were struck by thunder and lightning for their arrogance. Despite clear signs, they worshipped the calf, but We forgave them and gave Moses clear authority.

We raised Mount Sinai over them as a sign of their covenant and told them to enter the gate humbly and not to break the Sabbath. We made a firm covenant with them.

They incurred divine displeasure by breaking their covenant, rejecting God's signs, killing the prophets unjustly, and claiming their hearts were sealed. God sealed their hearts for their disbelief, so only a few believe.

They disbelieved and slandered Mary with a grave false charge. They boasted, "We killed Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, the Messenger of God," but they neither killed nor crucified him. It only appeared so to them. Those who differ are full of doubts, following conjecture. They certainly did not kill him.

Instead, God raised him up to Himself. God is Exalted in Power and Wise. Everyone among the People of the Book will believe in him before his death, and on the Day of Judgment, he will be a witness against them.

For the wrongdoing of the Jews, We made certain good and wholesome foods unlawful for them because they hindered many from God's way. They took usury, though forbidden, and wrongfully consumed people's wealth. We have prepared a grievous punishment for those who reject faith.

But those well-grounded in knowledge and the believers believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you. Those who establish regular prayer, practice charity, and believe in God and the Last Day will receive a great reward.

We sent you inspiration as We sent it to Noah and the messengers after him. We sent inspiration to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, the Tribes, Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, Solomon, and to David, We gave the Psalms.

We have told you the stories of some messengers and not others. God spoke directly to Moses. These messengers brought good news and warnings so that people would have no argument against God after the messengers. God is Exalted in Power and Wise.

God bears witness to what He has revealed to you from His knowledge, and the angels also bear witness. God is sufficient as a witness.

Those who reject faith and hinder others from God's way have strayed far from the path. God will not forgive or guide those who disbelieve and act unjustly, except to the path of Hell, where they will dwell forever. This is easy for God.O mankind! The Messenger has come to you with the truth from God. Believe in him; it is better for you. But if you reject faith, know that everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God, who is All-Knowing and Wise.

O People of the Book! Do not go to extremes in your religion and speak only the truth about God. Jesus, the son of Mary, was just a messenger of God, His word given to Mary, and a spirit from Him. So believe in God and His messengers. Do not say "Trinity"; stop, it is better for you. God is one and far above having a son. Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him, and He is sufficient as a protector.

The Messiah does not disdain being a servant of God, nor do the angels close to Him. Those who disdain His worship and are arrogant will be gathered to Him for judgment. Those who believe and do good deeds will receive their rewards and more from His bounty. But those who are arrogant and disdainful will face a severe punishment and will find no protector or helper besides God.

O mankind! A clear proof has come to you from your Lord, and We have sent down to you a clear light. Those who believe in God and hold fast to Him will be admitted to His mercy and grace and guided to a straight path.

They ask you for a legal decision. Say: God directs you about those who leave no descendants or ascendants as heirs. If a man dies leaving a sister but no child, she shall have half the inheritance. If a woman dies leaving no child, her brother takes her inheritance. If there are two sisters, they share two-thirds of the inheritance. If there are brothers and sisters, the male gets twice the share of the female. God makes His laws clear to you so you do not err. God knows all things.

Chapter 5: AL-MAEDA (THE TABLE SPREAD)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

O you who believe! Fulfill all obligations. Lawful for you are all four-footed animals, except those named. Animals of the chase are forbidden while you are in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb. God commands according to His will and plan.

O you who believe! Do not violate the sanctity of God's symbols, the sacred month, the animals brought for sacrifice, the garlands marking such animals, or the people going to the sacred house seeking their Lord's bounty and pleasure. When you are clear of the sacred precincts, you may hunt. Do not let hatred of people who once stopped you from the Sacred Mosque lead you to transgression. Help each other in righteousness and piety, but do not help each other in sin and aggression. Fear God, for He is strict in punishment.

Forbidden to you for food are dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which the name of other than God has been invoked; that which has been killed by strangling, a violent blow, a headlong fall, or being gored to death; that which has been partly eaten by a wild animal unless you are able to slaughter it properly; that which is sacrificed on stone altars; and the division of meat by raffling with arrows. This is impiety. Today, those who reject faith have given up all hope of your religion, so do not fear them but fear Me. Today, I have perfected your religion for you, completed My favor upon you, and chosen Islam as your religion. But if anyone is forced by hunger, with no inclination to transgression, God is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.Forbidden to you are animals that die on their own, blood, pork, and anything dedicated to other than God. Also forbidden are animals strangled, beaten to death, fallen from a height, gored, or partially eaten by wild animals unless you properly slaughter them. Sacrifices made on stone altars and dividing meat by drawing lots are also prohibited. These are sinful acts. Today, those who disbelieve have lost hope in harming your religion, so do not fear them, but fear Me. Today, I have perfected your religion, completed My favor upon you, and chosen Islam for you. If someone is forced by hunger, without intent to sin, God is Forgiving and Merciful.

They ask you what is lawful for them to eat. Say: All good and pure things are lawful for you. Also lawful are the animals caught by your trained hunting animals, as long as you mention God's name over them. Fear God, for He is swift in taking account.

Today, all good and pure things are made lawful for you. The food of the People of the Book is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them. Lawful for you in marriage are chaste women who are believers and chaste women from the People of the Book, provided you give them their due dowers and seek chastity, not lewdness or secret affairs. If anyone rejects faith, their work is in vain, and in the Hereafter, they will be among the losers.

O you who believe! When you prepare for prayer, wash your faces and hands up to the elbows, rub your heads, and wash your feet up to the ankles. If you are in a state of ceremonial impurity, bathe your whole body. If you are ill, on a journey, or have come from the toilet, or have had contact with women and cannot find water, then use clean sand or earth and rub your faces and hands with it. God does not wish to place you in difficulty but to make you clean and complete His favor upon you so that you may be grateful.

Remember God's favor upon you and His covenant when you said, "We hear and we obey." Fear God, for He knows well the secrets of your hearts.

O you who believe! Stand firmly for God as witnesses to fair dealing, and do not let hatred of others lead you to injustice. Be just, for that is closer to piety. Fear God, for He is well-acquainted with all that you do.

God has promised forgiveness and a great reward to those who believe and do righteous deeds. But those who reject faith and deny Our signs will be companions of Hellfire.

O you who believe! Remember God's favor when certain people intended to harm you, but He held back their hands. Fear God and put your trust in Him.

God took a covenant from the Children of Israel and appointed twelve leaders among them. God said, "I am with you if you establish regular prayers, give charity, believe in My messengers, honor and assist them, and lend to God a beautiful loan. I will wipe out your sins and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing beneath. But if any of you resist faith after this, they have truly strayed from the right path."Because they broke their covenant, We cursed them and made their hearts hard. They distort words from their proper places and forget a significant part of the message sent to them. You will always find them deceitful, except for a few. But forgive them and overlook their misdeeds, for God loves those who are kind.

We also made a covenant with those who call themselves Christians, but they forgot a part of the message sent to them. As a result, We stirred up enmity and hatred among them until the Day of Judgment. God will soon show them what they have done.

O People of the Book! Our Messenger has come to you, revealing much of what you used to hide in the Book and overlooking much. A new light and a clear Book have come to you from God.

With this Book, God guides those who seek His pleasure to paths of peace and safety, bringing them out of darkness into light and guiding them to a straight path.

Those who say that God is Christ, the son of Mary, are indeed blasphemous. Say: Who can do anything against God if He wills to destroy Christ, the son of Mary, his mother, and everyone on earth? To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between. He creates what He pleases, and He has power over all things.

The Jews and Christians say: "We are the sons of God and His beloved." Say: Why then does He punish you for your sins? No, you are just humans among those He has created. He forgives whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases. To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between, and to Him is the final return.

O People of the Book! Our Messenger has come to you, making things clear after a break in the series of messengers, so you cannot say: "No bringer of glad tidings and no warner came to us." Now a bringer of glad tidings and a warner has come to you. God has power over all things.

Remember when Moses said to his people: "O my people! Remember God's favor upon you when He raised prophets among you, made you kings, and gave you what He had not given to any other people."

"O my people! Enter the holy land which God has assigned to you, and do not turn back in fear, or you will be overthrown and ruined."

They said: "O Moses! In this land are people of great strength. We will never enter it until they leave. If they leave, then we will enter."

Two men who feared God and were blessed by Him said: "Attack them through the gate. When you enter, victory will be yours. Put your trust in God if you are believers."

They said: "O Moses! We will never enter as long as they are there. Go, you and your Lord, and fight. We will sit here."

Moses said: "O my Lord! I have control only over myself and my brother. Separate us from these rebellious people."

God said: "The land will be forbidden to them for forty years. They will wander in the land in distraction. Do not grieve over these rebellious people."So, it shall be forbidden to them for forty years, and they will wander in the land. Do not grieve for the nation of transgressors.

Recite to them the true story of the two sons of Adam. Each presented a sacrifice to God: it was accepted from one but not from the other. The latter said, "I will surely kill you." The former replied, "God accepts sacrifices only from the righteous."

He continued, "Even if you stretch your hand to kill me, I will not stretch my hand to kill you. I fear God, the Lord of the worlds. I intend to let you bear my sin and your own, for you will be among the companions of the fire. That is the reward for those who do wrong."

The selfish soul of the other led him to murder his brother, and he became one of the lost ones. Then God sent a raven to scratch the ground and show him how to hide his brother's body. He said, "Woe is me! Was I not even able to be like this raven and hide my brother's body?" He became full of regret.

Because of this, We ordained for the Children of Israel that if anyone kills a person—unless it is for murder or spreading mischief in the land—it is as if they killed all of humanity. And if anyone saves a life, it is as if they saved all of humanity. Our messengers came to them with clear signs, but many of them continued to commit excesses in the land.

The punishment for those who wage war against God and His Messenger and strive to spread mischief in the land is execution, crucifixion, cutting off hands and feet from opposite sides, or exile. This is their disgrace in this world, and they will have a heavy punishment in the Hereafter, except for those who repent before you overpower them. Know that God is Forgiving, Merciful.

O believers! Be mindful of your duty to God, seek ways to approach Him, and strive in His cause so that you may prosper. As for those who reject faith, even if they had everything on earth and twice as much to ransom themselves from the penalty of the Day of Judgment, it would not be accepted. They will have a grievous penalty. They will wish to escape the Fire, but they will not be able to. Their penalty will endure.

As for the thief, male or female, cut off their hands as a punishment for their crime, an exemplary punishment from God. God is Exalted in power. But if the thief repents after their crime and amends their conduct, God will forgive them. God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Do you not know that to God alone belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He pleases and forgives whom He pleases. God has power over all things.

O Messenger! Do not let those who race each other into unbelief grieve you, whether they say "We believe" with their lips but have no faith in their hearts, or it be among the Jews—people who listen to any lie and change words from their proper places. They say, "If you are given this, take it, but if not, beware!" If God intends a trial for anyone, you have no authority against God for them. For such people, there is disgrace in this world and a heavy punishment in the Hereafter.O Messenger, don't let those who rush into disbelief upset you, whether they say "We believe" with their mouths but have no faith in their hearts, or whether they are among the Jews who listen to lies and distort words from their proper places. They say, "If you are given this, accept it, but if not, beware!" If God intends to test someone, you cannot protect them from God. These are the ones whose hearts God does not wish to purify. They will face disgrace in this world and severe punishment in the Hereafter.

They love to listen to falsehood and consume what is forbidden. If they come to you for judgment, you can either judge between them or decline. If you decline, they cannot harm you. But if you judge, do so with fairness, for God loves those who are just.

Why do they come to you for judgment when they have the Torah, which contains God's judgment? Yet they turn away from it. These are not true believers.

We revealed the Torah, which contains guidance and light. The prophets who submitted to God judged by it for the Jews, as did the rabbis and scholars who were entrusted with God's Book. Do not fear people, but fear Me, and do not sell My revelations for a small price. Those who do not judge by what God has revealed are disbelievers.

We ordained for them in the Torah: life for life, eye for eye, nose for nose, ear for ear, tooth for tooth, and equal retaliation for wounds. But if anyone forgives out of charity, it will be an atonement for them. Those who do not judge by what God has revealed are wrongdoers.

We sent Jesus, son of Mary, following in the footsteps of the prophets, confirming the Torah that came before him. We gave him the Gospel, which contains guidance and light, confirming the Torah and serving as a guidance and admonition for those who fear God.

Let the people of the Gospel judge by what God has revealed in it. Those who do not judge by what God has revealed are rebels.

We sent down the Scripture to you, confirming the previous scriptures and guarding them. So judge between them by what God has revealed and do not follow their desires, diverging from the truth that has come to you. Each of you has been given a law and a way. If God had willed, He could have made you one community, but He tests you through what He has given you. So compete in doing good deeds. To God, you will all return, and He will inform you about the matters in which you differed.

Judge between them by what God has revealed and do not follow their desires. Be cautious of them, lest they lead you astray from some of what God has revealed to you. If they turn away, know that God intends to punish them for some of their sins. Many people are rebellious.

Do they seek the judgment of the days of ignorance? Who is better than God in judgment for a people who are certain in their faith?

O believers, do not take Jews and Christians as friends and protectors. They are friends and protectors to each other. Whoever among you takes them as friends is one of them. God does not guide unjust people.O believers, do not take Jews and Christians as friends and protectors; they are allies of each other. Whoever among you takes them as friends becomes one of them. God does not guide unjust people.

You see those with a disease in their hearts rushing to them, saying, "We fear a change of fortune might harm us." But perhaps God will grant you victory or a decision from Him, and then they will regret their secret thoughts.

Believers will say, "Are these the ones who swore their strongest oaths by God that they were with you?" Their deeds have failed, and they are the losers.

O believers, if any of you turn back from your faith, God will bring forth people whom He loves and who love Him, humble towards believers, stern towards disbelievers, striving in God's way, and not fearing the blame of anyone. This is God's grace, which He bestows on whom He wills. God is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.

Your true friends are God, His Messenger, and the believers who establish regular prayers and give charity while bowing in worship. Whoever takes God, His Messenger, and the believers as friends will be victorious.

O believers, do not take as friends those who mock your religion, whether they are from the People of the Book or disbelievers. Fear God if you are true believers.

When you call to prayer, they take it as a joke because they are people who do not understand.

Say, "O People of the Book, do you blame us for no other reason than that we believe in God and what has been revealed to us and what was revealed before, and because most of you are rebellious?"

Say, "Shall I tell you of a worse case than yours for retribution with God? Those whom God has cursed, upon whom His wrath has fallen, and whom He turned into apes and swine, and who worshipped evil. They are worse in rank and further astray from the right path."

When they come to you, they say, "We believe," but they enter with disbelief and leave with it. God knows best what they hide.

You see many of them racing each other in sin and hostility, and consuming what is forbidden. Evil indeed are the things they do.

Why do the rabbis and scholars not forbid them from uttering sinful words and consuming forbidden things? Evil indeed are their works.

The Jews say, "God's hand is tied up." Their hands are tied up, and they are cursed for what they say. No, both His hands are widely outstretched; He gives and spends as He pleases. What has been revealed to you from your Lord increases many of them in rebellion and disbelief. We have placed enmity and hatred among them until the Day of Judgment. Every time they kindle the fire of war, God extinguishes it. They strive to do mischief on earth, and God does not love those who do mischief.

If only the People of the Book had believed and been righteous, We would have blotted out their sins and admitted them to gardens of bliss.If the People of the Book had truly believed and followed the teachings of the Torah and the Gospel, they would have been blessed with abundance from above and below. Among them, there are some who are on the right path, but many follow a path of evil.

O Messenger, deliver the message revealed to you from your Lord. If you do not, you have not fulfilled your mission. God will protect you from those who wish to harm you. God does not guide those who reject faith.

Say, "O People of the Book, you have no true guidance unless you uphold the Torah, the Gospel, and what has been revealed to you from your Lord." The revelation from your Lord increases many of them in rebellion and disbelief. Do not grieve for those who disbelieve.

Those who believe in the Qur'an, the Jews, the Sabians, and the Christians—anyone who believes in God and the Last Day and does good deeds—will have no fear and will not grieve.

We made a covenant with the Children of Israel and sent them messengers. Whenever a messenger came with what they did not desire, they called some impostors and killed others. They thought there would be no punishment, so they became blind and deaf. Yet God turned to them in mercy, but many of them remained blind and deaf. God sees all that they do.

Those who say, "God is Christ, the son of Mary," disbelieve. Christ himself said, "O Children of Israel, worship God, my Lord and your Lord." Whoever associates others with God, God will forbid them from Paradise, and their abode will be the Fire. There will be no helpers for the wrongdoers.

Those who say, "God is one of three in a Trinity," disbelieve. There is no god but One God. If they do not stop saying this, a painful punishment will befall them. Will they not turn to God and seek His forgiveness? God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Christ, the son of Mary, was only a messenger; many messengers passed away before him. His mother was a truthful woman. They both ate food. See how clear We make the signs for them, yet see how they are deluded away from the truth.

Say, "Do you worship besides God something that has no power to harm or benefit you? God is the Hearer, the Knower."

Say, "O People of the Book, do not exceed the bounds of truth in your religion, nor follow the desires of those who went astray before and led many others astray."

Those among the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongues of David and Jesus, the son of Mary, because they disobeyed and transgressed. They did not forbid one another from the wrongs they committed. Evil indeed were their deeds.

You see many of them turning in friendship to the disbelievers. Evil indeed are the deeds they have sent ahead for themselves, resulting in God's wrath and eternal torment.If the People of the Book had truly believed and followed the teachings of the Torah and the Gospel, they would have been blessed with abundance from above and below. Among them, there are some who are on the right path, but many follow a path of evil.

O Messenger, deliver the message revealed to you from your Lord. If you do not, you have not fulfilled your mission. God will protect you from those who wish to harm you. God does not guide those who reject faith.

Say, "O People of the Book, you have no true guidance unless you uphold the Torah, the Gospel, and what has been revealed to you from your Lord." The revelation from your Lord increases many of them in rebellion and disbelief. Do not grieve for those who disbelieve.

Those who believe in the Qur'an, the Jews, the Sabians, and the Christians—anyone who believes in God and the Last Day and does good deeds—will have no fear and will not grieve.

We made a covenant with the Children of Israel and sent them messengers. Whenever a messenger came with what they did not desire, they called some impostors and killed others. They thought there would be no punishment, so they became blind and deaf. Yet God turned to them in mercy, but many of them remained blind and deaf. God sees all that they do.

Those who say, "God is Christ, the son of Mary," disbelieve. Christ himself said, "O Children of Israel, worship God, my Lord and your Lord." Whoever associates others with God, God will forbid them from Paradise, and their abode will be the Fire. There will be no helpers for the wrongdoers.

Those who say, "God is one of three in a Trinity," disbelieve. There is no god but One God. If they do not stop saying this, a painful punishment will befall them. Will they not turn to God and seek His forgiveness? God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Christ, the son of Mary, was only a messenger; many messengers passed away before him. His mother was a truthful woman. They both ate food. See how clear We make the signs for them, yet see how they are deluded away from the truth.

Say, "Do you worship besides God something that has no power to harm or benefit you? God is the Hearer, the Knower."

Say, "O People of the Book, do not exceed the bounds of truth in your religion, nor follow the desires of those who went astray before and led many others astray."

Those among the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongues of David and Jesus, the son of Mary, because they disobeyed and transgressed. They did not forbid one another from the wrongs they committed. Evil indeed were their deeds.

You see many of them turning in friendship to the disbelievers. Evil indeed are the deeds they have sent ahead for themselves, resulting in God's wrath and eternal torment.

If only they had believed in God, in the Prophet, and in what has been revealed to him, they would never have taken disbelievers as friends and protectors. But most of them are rebellious wrongdoers.

You will find the most hostile people towards the believers to be the Jews and the pagans. And you will find the nearest in affection to the believers to be those who say, "We are Christians." This is because among them are priests and monks, and they are not arrogant.

When they listen to the revelation received by the Messenger, you will see their eyes overflowing with tears because they recognize the truth. They pray, "Our Lord! We believe; write us down among the witnesses."

What reason do we have not to believe in God and the truth that has come to us, while we earnestly desire that our Lord should cause us to enter with the righteous?

God has rewarded them for their prayer with gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will abide forever. This is the reward for those who do good.

But those who reject faith and deny Our signs will be companions of the Hellfire.

O you who believe! Do not make unlawful the good things which God has made lawful for you, but do not commit excess. God does not love those who exceed the limits.

Eat of the lawful and good things that God has provided for you, and be mindful of your duty to God, in whom you believe.

God will not call you to account for what is futile in your oaths, but He will call you to account for your deliberate oaths. For expiation, feed ten needy people with the average food of your families, or clothe them, or free a slave. If that is beyond your means, fast for three days. This is the expiation for your oaths when you have sworn. But keep to your oaths. Thus does God make clear to you His signs, that you may be grateful.

O you who believe! Intoxicants, gambling, dedication of stones, and divination by arrows are abominations of Satan's handiwork. Avoid them so that you may prosper.

Satan's plan is to excite enmity and hatred between you with intoxicants and gambling and to hinder you from the remembrance of God and from prayer. Will you not then abstain?

Obey God and obey the Messenger, and beware of evil. If you turn back, know that the duty of Our Messenger is only to convey the message clearly.

There is no blame on those who believe and do good deeds for what they ate in the past, as long as they guard themselves from evil, believe, and do good deeds. God loves those who do good.

O you who believe! God will test you with some game that is within reach of your hands and lances, so that He may know who fears Him unseen. Whoever transgresses after this will have a painful punishment.

O you who believe! Do not kill game while in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb. If any of you does so intentionally, the compensation is an offering brought to the Ka'ba of a domestic animal equivalent to the one he killed, as judged by two just men among you, or by feeding the needy, or its equivalent in fasting. This is to make him taste the penalty of his deed. God forgives what is past, but for repetition, God will exact from him."O believers, do not hunt while you are on pilgrimage. If anyone does so intentionally, they must compensate by offering a domestic animal equivalent to what they killed, as judged by two just men among you, or by feeding the poor, or fasting. This is to make them experience the consequences of their actions. God forgives past actions, but if someone repeats the offense, God will take retribution. God is Mighty and capable of retribution.

Hunting and eating sea game is allowed for you, as a provision for you and travelers, but hunting land game is forbidden while you are on pilgrimage. Be mindful of God, to whom you will be gathered.

God has made the Ka'ba, the Sacred House, a place of security for people, as well as the sacred months, the offerings, and the garlands marking them. This is so you may know that God knows everything in the heavens and the earth, and that God is all-knowing.

Know that God is strict in punishment but also forgiving and merciful.

The Messenger's duty is only to convey the message. God knows what you reveal and what you conceal.

Say: "The bad and the good are not equal, even if the abundance of the bad may dazzle you. So be mindful of your duty to God, O people of understanding, so you may succeed."

O believers, do not ask about things which, if made clear to you, may cause you trouble. But if you ask about them when the Qur'an is being revealed, they will be made clear to you. God has forgiven this, for God is forgiving and forbearing.

Some people before you asked such questions and then lost their faith because of it.

God did not institute superstitions like the slit-ear she-camel, or the she-camel let loose for free pasture, or idol sacrifices for twin-births in animals, or stallion-camels freed from work. It is the disbelievers who invent lies against God, but most of them lack wisdom.

When it is said to them, "Come to what God has revealed and to the Messenger," they say, "What we found our fathers following is enough for us." Even though their fathers had no knowledge or guidance?

O believers, take care of your own souls. If you follow the right guidance, those who go astray cannot harm you. To God is your return, and He will inform you of what you used to do.

O believers, when death approaches any of you, take witnesses among yourselves when making bequests—two just men from among you or two others from outside if you are traveling and death befalls you. If you doubt their truth, detain them after prayer and let them swear by God: "We wish not in this for any worldly gain, even if the beneficiary is a near relation. We shall not hide the evidence before God; if we do, then the sin be upon us."

But if it is later found that these two were guilty of perjury, let two others stand in their place, nearest in kin from those who claim a lawful right. Let them swear by God: "Our testimony is truer than theirs, and we have not trespassed beyond the truth. If we did, the wrong would be upon us."

This is most suitable so they may give true evidence, or else they would fear that other oaths would be taken after theirs."Be mindful of God and listen to His guidance, for God does not guide rebellious people. This approach encourages truthful testimony and deters false oaths. On the Day of Judgment, God will gather the messengers and ask about the response they received from people. They will reply that only God knows the hidden things.

God will remind Jesus, son of Mary, of His favors: how He strengthened him with the Holy Spirit, enabling him to speak to people in childhood and maturity, taught him the Scriptures, and allowed him to perform miracles by His permission. Jesus healed the blind and the lepers, raised the dead, and was protected from harm by the Children of Israel, who accused him of magic.

God inspired the disciples to believe in Him and His messenger, and they declared their faith. The disciples asked Jesus if God could send down a table of food from heaven. Jesus advised them to fear God if they truly believed. They wanted to eat from it to satisfy their hearts and confirm the truth of Jesus' message.

Jesus prayed to God to send down a table of food as a sign and a source of sustenance. God agreed but warned that those who disbelieve afterward would face severe punishment. On the Day of Judgment, God will ask Jesus if he told people to worship him and his mother as gods. Jesus will deny it, affirming that he only conveyed God's command to worship Him alone.

Jesus will say he was a witness over the people while he was among them, but after God took him, He was the Watcher over them. Jesus will acknowledge that if God punishes them, they are His servants, and if He forgives them, He is the Mighty, the Wise.

God will declare that the truthful will benefit from their truthfulness on that day, receiving eternal gardens with rivers flowing beneath. God will be pleased with them, and they with Him, which is the ultimate success. God has dominion over the heavens and the earth and has power over all things.Praise be to God, the Most Merciful, who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light. Yet, some people still reject faith and equate others with their Guardian-Lord. God created you from clay and set a fixed term for you, yet you doubt His presence. He knows everything you hide and reveal, and what you earn by your deeds.

Despite receiving signs from their Lord, people turn away and reject the truth. They will soon realize the reality of what they mocked. Many generations before were destroyed for their sins, even though they were more established on earth and received abundant rain and flowing rivers. If God had sent a written message on parchment, the unbelievers would still call it magic. They demand an angel, but if an angel were sent, the matter would be settled instantly, leaving no time for reflection.

If God had sent an angel, it would have been in human form, causing more confusion. Messengers before Muhammad were mocked, but the mockers were eventually surrounded by what they mocked. God commands to travel the earth and see the fate of those who rejected the truth. Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to God, who has inscribed mercy for Himself and will gather everyone on the Day of Judgment. Those who ruin their souls will not believe.

God knows everything that dwells in the night and day. He is the one who hears and knows all things. Should anyone take a protector other than God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, who feeds but is not fed? Muhammad is commanded to be the first to submit to God and not join others with Him. Disobeying God brings fear of a mighty penalty on the Day of Judgment. If God's mercy averts the penalty, it is a clear triumph.

If God touches you with affliction, only He can remove it. If He grants you happiness, no one can impair it. He is the Omnipotent, the Wise, and the Knower. God is the most weighty in evidence, and the Qur'an was revealed to warn everyone. There is no other god besides God, and Muhammad is innocent of associating others with Him. Those who received the Book know this truth as they know their own sons.Those who received the Scripture recognize this revelation as they recognize their own children. However, those who have lost their souls refuse to believe. Who does more wrong than someone who invents lies about God or rejects His signs? Wrongdoers will never succeed.

On the Day of Judgment, God will gather everyone and ask those who associated partners with Him, "Where are the partners you talked about?" They will have no excuse but to say, "By God, our Lord, we were not idolaters." See how they lie against themselves, and the falsehoods they invented will abandon them.

Some people pretend to listen, but their hearts are veiled, and their ears are deaf. Even if they saw every sign, they would not believe. When they come to argue, they say, "These are just tales of the ancients." They keep others away from the truth and avoid it themselves, destroying their own souls without realizing it.

If you could see them when they are confronted with the Fire, they will say, "If only we could be sent back, we would not reject the signs of our Lord and would be among the believers!" But even if they were sent back, they would return to their forbidden ways because they are liars.

They say, "There is nothing but our life on this earth, and we will not be raised again." If you could see them when they are confronted with their Lord, He will ask, "Is this not the truth?" They will say, "Yes, by our Lord!" He will then say, "Taste the penalty for your disbelief."

Those who deny meeting God are truly lost. When the Hour comes upon them suddenly, they will cry, "Alas for us, we neglected it!" They will bear their burdens on their backs, and what a terrible burden it is. The life of this world is just play and amusement, but the home in the hereafter is better for the righteous. Will you not understand?

We know the grief their words cause you. They do not reject you, but they reject the signs of God. Messengers before you were also rejected, but they patiently endured until Our help reached them. No one can change the words of God. You have already received some accounts of those messengers.

If their rejection is hard on you, seek a way to bring them a sign, but know that if God willed, He could have guided them all. Do not be among the ignorant. Only those who listen will accept the truth. As for the dead, God will raise them up, and they will return to Him.

They ask, "Why hasn't a sign been sent down to him from his Lord?" Say, "God has the power to send down a sign, but most of them do not understand." There is not an animal on earth or a bird that flies with its wings that does not form communities like you. Nothing is omitted from the Book, and they will all be gathered to their Lord in the end.There is no creature on earth or bird that flies with wings that isn't part of a community like you. We haven't left anything out of the Book. In the end, they will all be gathered to their Lord.

Those who reject our signs are like the deaf and dumb, lost in deep darkness. God leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills to the right path.

Say: "If God's punishment or the Hour comes upon you, would you call upon anyone other than God? Answer if you are truthful!" No, you would call upon Him, and if He wills, He would remove your distress, and you would forget the partners you associated with Him.

Before you, We sent messengers to many nations, and We afflicted them with suffering and adversity so they might learn humility. But when suffering came from Us, they did not humble themselves; instead, their hearts became hardened, and Satan made their sinful acts seem attractive to them.

When they forgot the warnings they had received, We opened the gates of all good things for them. But while they were rejoicing, We suddenly called them to account, and they were plunged into despair. The wrongdoers were cut off, and all praise is due to God, the Lord of the worlds.

Say: "If God took away your hearing, sight, and sealed your hearts, who could restore them but God?" See how We explain the signs, yet they turn away.

Say: "If God's punishment comes to you suddenly or openly, will anyone be destroyed except the wrongdoers?"

We send messengers only to give good news and to warn. Those who believe and do right will have no fear or grief. But those who reject Our signs will face punishment for their disobedience.

Say: "I do not claim to possess God's treasures, know the unseen, or be an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me." Are the blind and the seeing equal? Will you not reflect?

Warn those who fear being gathered before their Lord, who have no protector or intercessor besides Him, so they may guard against evil.

Do not turn away those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, seeking His favor. You are not accountable for them, nor are they accountable for you. If you turn them away, you would be unjust.

We test some people by comparing them with others, so they may say, "Are these the ones God has favored among us?" Does God not know best who is grateful?

When those who believe in Our signs come to you, say: "Peace be upon you. Your Lord has prescribed mercy for Himself. If any of you does evil in ignorance and then repents and does right, He is Forgiving, Merciful."

Thus, We explain the signs in detail so the way of the sinners may be clear.

Say: "I am forbidden to worship those you call upon besides God. I will not follow your desires, for if I did, I would go astray and not be guided."Say: "I am forbidden to worship those you call upon besides God. I do not follow your desires, for if I did, I would go astray and not be rightly guided."

Say: "I rely on clear proof from my Lord, but you reject Him. What you want to be hastened is not in my power. The decision rests with God alone. He declares the truth, and He is the best judge."

Say: "If what you want to be hastened were in my power, the matter would be settled between us. But God knows best who does wrong."

With Him are the keys to the unseen, treasures that only He knows. He knows everything on earth and in the sea. Not a leaf falls without His knowledge, nor a grain in the darkness of the earth, nor anything fresh or dry, but it is all recorded in a clear book.

He is the one who takes your souls by night and knows what you do by day. Then He raises you up again each day until your appointed time is fulfilled. In the end, you will return to Him, and He will show you the truth of all that you did.

He is the irresistible, watching over His worshippers, and He sets guardians over you. When death approaches one of you, Our angels take his soul, and they never fail in their duty.

Then people are returned to God, their true protector. His is the command, and He is the swiftest in taking account.

Say: "Who delivers you from the dark recesses of land and sea when you call upon Him in humility and silent terror, saying, 'If He only delivers us from these dangers, we will truly show our gratitude'?"

Say: "It is God who delivers you from these and all other distresses, yet you worship false gods!"

Say: "He has the power to send calamities on you from above and below, or to cover you with confusion in party strife, giving you a taste of mutual vengeance." See how We explain the signs in various ways so that they may understand.

But your people reject this, though it is the truth. Say: "I am not responsible for arranging your affairs."

For every message, there is a limit of time, and soon you will know it.

When you see people engaged in vain discourse about Our signs, turn away from them unless they change the topic. If Satan ever makes you forget, then after recollection, do not sit with those who do wrong.

The righteous are not accountable for them, but their duty is to remind them so that they may learn to fear God.

Leave those who take their religion as mere play and amusement and are deceived by the life of this world. But proclaim to them this truth: every soul delivers itself to ruin by its own acts. It will find no protector or intercessor except God. If it offered every ransom, none would be accepted. Such is the end of those who ruin themselves by their own acts. They will have boiling water to drink and a grievous punishment because they rejected God.

Say: "Shall we call on others besides God, things that can neither benefit nor harm us, and turn back after receiving guidance from God? Like one whom the evil ones have made into a fool, wandering bewildered through the earth, his friends calling, 'Come to us,' vainly guiding him to the path." Say: "God's guidance is the only guidance, and we have been directed to submit ourselves to the Lord of the worlds.""Should we turn back after God has guided us, like someone whom the devils have led astray, wandering confused on the earth? He has friends calling him to the right path, saying, 'Come to us.' Say: 'God's guidance is the true guidance, and we are commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds.'

To establish regular prayers and to fear God, for it is to Him that we shall be gathered together. He created the heavens and the earth in true proportions. When He says, 'Be,' it is. His word is the truth. His will is the dominion on the day the trumpet will be blown. He knows the unseen and the seen. He is the Wise, well-acquainted with all things.

Remember when Abraham said to his father Azar, 'Do you take idols for gods? I see you and your people in clear error.' Thus, We showed Abraham the power and laws of the heavens and the earth so that he might have certainty. When the night covered him, he saw a star and said, 'This is my Lord.' But when it set, he said, 'I do not love those that set.'

When he saw the moon rising, he said, 'This is my Lord.' But when it set, he said, 'Unless my Lord guides me, I shall surely be among those who go astray.' When he saw the sun rising, he said, 'This is my Lord; this is the greatest.' But when the sun set, he said, 'O my people! I am indeed free from your guilt of giving partners to God.'

I have set my face firmly and truly towards Him who created the heavens and the earth, and I will never give partners to God. His people disputed with him. He said, 'Do you dispute with me about God when He has guided me? I do not fear those you associate with Him unless my Lord wills. My Lord comprehends all things in His knowledge. Will you not be admonished?'

How should I fear those you associate with God when you do not fear to give partners to God without any warrant? Which of the two parties has more right to security? If you know, it is those who believe and do not mix their faith with wrongdoing. They are truly in security and rightly guided.

That was the reasoning We gave to Abraham against his people. We raise whom We will, degree after degree. Your Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge. We gave him Isaac and Jacob, all guided. Before him, We guided Noah, and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. Thus do We reward those who do good.

And Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elias, all in the ranks of the righteous. And Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot. We gave favor to all above the nations. With some of their forefathers, their offspring, and their brethren, We chose them and guided them to a straight path. This is the guidance of God. He gives that guidance to whom He pleases among His worshippers. If they were to join other gods with Him, all that they did would be in vain.

These were the men to whom We gave the Book, authority, and prophethood. If their descendants reject them, We shall entrust their charge to a new people who will not reject them. Those were the prophets who received God's guidance. Follow their guidance. Say: 'No reward do I ask of you for this. It is no less than a message for the nations.'

They do not make a just estimate of God when they say, 'Nothing does God send down to man by way of revelation.' Say: 'Who then sent down the Book which Moses brought, a light and guidance for the people?'""Say: 'God sent it down.' Then leave them to their pointless arguments. They don't truly understand God's power when they say He hasn't revealed anything to humans. Ask them, 'Who revealed the Book that Moses brought, a light and guidance for people?' You make it into separate writings, showing some parts and hiding others. You were taught things you and your ancestors didn't know. Say: 'God sent it down.' Then leave them to their idle talk.

This is a blessed Book We have sent down, confirming previous revelations, so you may warn the central city and those around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe in this Book and are diligent in their prayers.

Who is more wicked than someone who invents lies about God or claims, 'I have received inspiration,' when they haven't, or says, 'I can reveal something like what God has revealed'? If you could see the wrongdoers in the throes of death, with angels stretching out their hands saying, 'Give up your souls. Today you will be repaid with a penalty of shame for lying about God and arrogantly rejecting His signs.'

You come to Us alone, as We created you the first time, leaving behind all the blessings We gave you. We don't see your intercessors, whom you claimed had a share in your affairs. All your ties are now cut off, and your assumptions have failed you.

God causes the seed and date-stone to split and sprout. He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. That is God. How are you then turned away from the truth?

He splits the daybreak and makes the night for rest, and the sun and moon for timekeeping. This is the judgment of the Mighty, the Wise. He made the stars for you to navigate through the darkness of land and sea. We have detailed Our signs for people who know.

He created you from a single person and provided a place of sojourn and departure. We have detailed Our signs for people who understand.

He sends down rain from the sky, producing vegetation of all kinds. From it, We bring forth green crops, grain, date clusters, gardens of grapes, olives, and pomegranates, similar yet different. Look at their fruit when they bear and ripen. These are signs for people who believe.

Yet they make the jinn equals with God, though He created them. They falsely attribute sons and daughters to Him without knowledge. Praise and glory be to Him, above what they attribute to Him!

He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. How can He have a son when He has no consort? He created everything and knows all things. That is God, your Lord. There is no god but Him, the Creator of all things. Worship Him, for He takes care of all affairs."God oversees everything. No one can fully grasp Him, but He sees everything. He is beyond our understanding, yet He knows all. Clear signs have come from your Lord. If you choose to see, it's for your own benefit; if you choose to be blind, it's to your own detriment. I'm not here to control your actions.

We explain our signs in various ways so people might say, "You have studied well," and so we can make things clear for those who seek knowledge. Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord; there is no god but Him. Turn away from those who associate others with God.

If God had willed, they wouldn't have worshipped false gods. You are not responsible for their actions. Don't insult those they worship besides God, as they might insult God out of ignorance. Every nation finds its own deeds appealing. In the end, they will return to their Lord, and He will inform them of what they did.

They swear by God that if a special sign came to them, they would believe. Say, "All signs are with God." But even if signs came, they wouldn't believe. We will turn their hearts and eyes away because they refused to believe initially. We will leave them to wander blindly in their defiance.

Even if we sent angels, made the dead speak, and gathered everything before them, they wouldn't believe unless God willed it. Most of them ignore the truth. We have made enemies for every prophet, including evil ones among humans and jinn, who deceive with fancy words. If your Lord had willed, they wouldn't have done it. So leave them and their fabrications alone.

Let those who don't believe in the Hereafter be drawn to deceit and take pleasure in it. They will earn what they deserve. Say, "Shall I seek a judge other than God when He has sent you the Book, explained in detail?" Those who received the Book know it is from your Lord in truth. Don't be among the doubters.

The word of your Lord is fulfilled in truth and justice. No one can change His words. He hears and knows everything. If you follow the majority on earth, they will lead you away from God's path. They follow nothing but conjecture and lies. Your Lord knows best who strays and who is rightly guided.

Eat what God's name has been pronounced over if you believe in His signs. Why shouldn't you eat what God's name has been mentioned over when He has explained what is forbidden, except in cases of necessity? Many are misled by their desires due to ignorance. Your Lord knows best who transgresses.

Avoid all sin, whether open or secret. Those who earn sin will be repaid for what they have earned. Don't eat meat on which God's name hasn't been mentioned.Don't eat meat that hasn't had God's name mentioned over it; it's sinful. The devils encourage their followers to argue with you, but if you follow them, you'll become idolaters. 

Can someone who was spiritually dead and then given life and guidance be like someone who remains in darkness? To non-believers, their actions seem appealing.

In every town, we've placed leaders among the wicked to plot, but they only harm themselves without realizing it. When a sign from God comes, they demand more, saying they won't believe until they receive the same as God's messengers. God knows best where to place His message. The wicked will face humiliation and severe punishment for their schemes.

Those whom God guides, He opens their hearts to Islam. Those He leaves astray, He makes their hearts tight and constricted, as if they were climbing to the sky. This is how God punishes those who refuse to believe.

This is the straight path of your Lord. We have detailed our signs for those who heed the warning. For the righteous, there will be a home of peace with their Lord, who will be their friend because of their good deeds.

On the Day of Judgment, God will gather the jinn and humans and say, "O assembly of jinn! You misled many humans." Their human friends will say, "Our Lord, we benefited from each other, but now we've reached our appointed term." God will say, "The Fire is your home, to dwell in forever, except as God wills." Your Lord is Wise and Knowing.

We make wrongdoers turn to each other because of their actions. God sent messengers to warn you, but you were deceived by worldly life and rejected faith. Your Lord wouldn't destroy towns unjustly while their people were unaware.

Everyone will be judged according to their deeds. Your Lord is not unaware of what they do. He is self-sufficient and full of mercy. If He wills, He can replace you with others, just as He raised you from the descendants of other people.

What you are promised will surely come to pass, and you cannot escape it. Say, "O my people, do whatever you can; I will do my part. Soon you will know who will have a good end in the Hereafter. The wrongdoers will not succeed."

They assign a portion of their crops and cattle to God and another portion to their idols. What they assign to their idols doesn't reach God, but what they assign to God goes to their idols. This is an evil and unjust practice.They say that certain cattle and crops are forbidden, and only specific people can eat them. They also claim that some cattle are not to be used for work or that God's name should not be mentioned when slaughtering them. These are lies against God, and He will punish them for their fabrications.

They also say that what is in the wombs of certain cattle is reserved for men and forbidden for women, but if it is stillborn, everyone can share it. God will punish them for these false claims. They have indeed gone astray and are not following the right path.

God is the one who creates gardens, both trellised and untrellised, date palms, crops of different flavors, olives, and pomegranates. Eat their fruits when they ripen and give the due share on the day of harvest. Do not waste, for God does not love those who waste.

Some cattle are for carrying burdens, and some are for meat. Eat what God has provided and do not follow Satan's footsteps, for he is your clear enemy.

There are eight pairs of cattle: two of sheep, two of goats, two of camels, and two of oxen. Ask them if God has forbidden the males, the females, or what is in the wombs of the females. They should provide knowledge if they are truthful. Who is more unjust than one who lies about God to mislead people without knowledge? God does not guide the unjust.

Say, "I do not find anything forbidden to eat except dead meat, blood, pork (which is impure), or meat sacrificed in the name of other than God. But if someone is forced by necessity without willful disobedience, God is Forgiving and Merciful."

For those who follow Jewish law, God forbade animals with undivided hooves and the fat of oxen and sheep, except what is on their backs, entrails, or mixed with bones. This was a punishment for their disobedience, and God's ordinances are true.

If they accuse you of lying, say, "Your Lord is full of all-encompassing mercy, but His punishment will not be averted from the guilty."

Those who associate partners with God will say, "If God had willed, we would not have done so, nor would our ancestors, nor would we have forbidden anything." This is how their ancestors argued falsely until they faced God's wrath. Say, "Do you have any knowledge to support this? You follow nothing but conjecture and lies."They say, "If God had willed, we wouldn't have worshipped others or forbidden anything." This is the same argument their ancestors used until they faced God's punishment. Ask them, "Do you have any knowledge to support this?" They only follow assumptions and lies.

Say, "God has the final argument. If He had willed, He could have guided all of you." Ask them to bring witnesses to prove that God forbade certain things. If they bring witnesses, don't join them. Don't follow the desires of those who deny God's signs and don't believe in the Hereafter.

Say, "Come, let me tell you what God has really forbidden: Don't associate anything with Him, be good to your parents, don't kill your children out of poverty—we provide for you and them. Avoid shameful deeds, whether open or secret, and don't take a life that God has made sacred, except by way of justice. This is what He commands you, so you may learn wisdom."

Don't approach the property of orphans except to improve it until they reach maturity. Give full measure and weight with justice. We don't burden any soul beyond its capacity. When you speak, be just, even if it's against a relative. Fulfill God's covenant so you may remember.

This is My straight path, so follow it. Don't follow other paths, as they will lead you away from His way. This is what He has ordained for you, so you may be righteous.

We gave Moses the Book, completing Our favor to those who do right, explaining all things in detail, and as a guide and mercy, so they might believe in meeting their Lord.

This is a blessed Book We have revealed. Follow it and be righteous so you may receive mercy. Don't say, "The Book was sent down to two groups before us, and we were unaware of what they read." Or, "If the Book had been sent to us, we would have followed its guidance better." Now a clear sign has come to you from your Lord, a guide and mercy. Who is more unjust than one who rejects God's signs and turns away from them? We will punish those who turn away from Our signs with a dreadful penalty.

Are they waiting for the angels to come to them, or for your Lord to come, or for some signs of your Lord? On the day when some signs of your Lord come, no soul will benefit from its faith if it didn't believe before or earn good through its faith. Say, "Wait, we too are waiting."

As for those who divide their religion and break into sects, you have no part in them. Their affair is with God, who will tell them the truth of all they did.

Whoever does good will have ten times the credit. Whoever does evil will only be recompensed according to their evil. No wrong will be done to them.

Say, "My Lord has guided me to a straight path, a right religion, the path of Abraham, who was true in faith and did not join gods with God."Say: "My Lord has guided me to the right path, the true faith of Abraham, who was upright and not a polytheist. My prayer, my worship, my life, and my death are all for God, the Lord of the Worlds. He has no partner. This is what I am commanded, and I am the first to submit to His will."

Say: "Shall I seek a lord other than God, when He is the Lord of all things? Every soul earns only for itself, and no one can bear another's burden. Your return is to God, and He will inform you of what you used to dispute."

He is the one who made you inheritors of the earth and raised some of you above others in rank to test you with what He has given you. Your Lord is swift in punishment, yet He is Forgiving and Merciful.

Chapter 7: Al-Araf (The Heights)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Alif, Lam, Mim, Sad. This is a Book revealed to you, so let there be no distress in your heart because of it. It is meant to warn and remind the believers. Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord and do not follow other protectors besides Him. Little do you remember!

How many towns have We destroyed for their sins? Our punishment came upon them suddenly by night or while they slept at noon. When Our punishment took them, their only cry was, "Indeed, we were wrongdoers."

We will question those to whom Our message was sent and those by whom We sent it. We will recount their story with knowledge, for We were never absent. The weighing on that day will be just. Those whose scale of good deeds is heavy will prosper, and those whose scale is light will lose their souls because they wrongfully treated Our signs.

We have placed you with authority on earth and provided you with means for your livelihood, yet little thanks do you give. We created you and gave you shape, then told the angels to prostrate to Adam, and they did, except for Iblis who refused.

God said, "What prevented you from prostrating when I commanded you?" Iblis said, "I am better than him. You created me from fire and him from clay." God said, "Get down from here. It is not for you to be arrogant here. Get out, for you are of the meanest."

Iblis said, "Give me respite till the day they are raised up." God said, "You are among those given respite." Iblis said, "Because You have thrown me out of the way, I will lie in wait for them on Your straight path. Then I will assault them from before them and behind them, from their right and their left, and You will not find most of them grateful."

God said, "Get out from here, disgraced and expelled. If any of them follow you, I will fill Hell with all of you."

"O Adam, dwell you and your wife in the Garden and eat from wherever you wish, but do not approach this tree, or you will be among the wrongdoers." Then Satan whispered to them, revealing their shame that was hidden from them. He said, "Your Lord only forbade you this tree lest you become angels or immortal."Satan whispered to them, revealing their hidden shame, and said, "Your Lord only forbade you this tree so you wouldn't become angels or immortals." He swore to them, "I am a sincere adviser to you." By deceit, he led them to their downfall. When they tasted the tree, their shame became apparent, and they began to cover themselves with leaves. Their Lord called out, "Did I not forbid you from that tree and tell you that Satan is your enemy?"

They replied, "Our Lord, we have wronged ourselves. If You do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we will be lost." God said, "Descend, with enmity between yourselves. On earth, you will live and die, and from it, you will be resurrected."

"O Children of Adam, We have given you clothing to cover your shame and as an adornment. But the clothing of righteousness is the best. These are signs from God so you may remember. Do not let Satan seduce you as he did your parents, stripping them of their innocence to expose their shame. He and his tribe see you from where you cannot see them. We have made the devils friends to those who do not believe."

When they commit shameful acts, they say, "We found our ancestors doing this, and God commanded us to do so." Say, "God does not command shameful deeds. Do you say about God what you do not know?"

Say, "My Lord commands justice. Set your faces towards Him at every place of worship and call upon Him sincerely. As He created you in the beginning, so shall you return." Some He has guided, while others have chosen error, taking devils as protectors instead of God, thinking they are rightly guided.

"O Children of Adam, wear your beautiful apparel at every place of prayer, eat and drink, but do not waste, for God does not love the wasteful." Say, "Who has forbidden the beautiful gifts of God, which He has produced for His servants, and the clean and pure things for sustenance?" Say, "They are for those who believe in this life, and purely for them on the Day of Judgment." Thus, We explain the signs in detail for those who understand.

Say, "My Lord has forbidden shameful deeds, whether open or secret, sins, wrongful oppression, associating partners with God without any authority, and saying things about God without knowledge." Every nation has its appointed term. When their time comes, they cannot delay it nor advance it.

"O Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from among yourselves, reciting My signs, those who are righteous and mend their ways will have no fear nor will they grieve. But those who reject Our signs and treat them with arrogance are companions of the Fire, to dwell therein forever."Those who deny Our revelations and scorn them are destined for the Fire, where they will remain forever. Who is more unjust than the one who invents lies about God or rejects His signs? When our messengers come to take their souls, they will ask, "Where are those you used to invoke besides God?" They will reply, "They have abandoned us," and they will admit their disbelief.

God will say, "Enter the Fire with the people who passed before you, both humans and jinn." Each time a new group enters, they will curse the ones before them. The last group will say, "Our Lord, they misled us, so give them double the punishment." God will respond, "Each will have double, but you do not understand."

The first group will say to the last, "You were no better than us, so taste the punishment for what you did." Those who reject Our signs and act arrogantly will not have the gates of heaven opened for them, nor will they enter Paradise until a camel can pass through the eye of a needle. They will have Hell as their bed and coverings. This is how We repay wrongdoers.

But those who believe and do good deeds, within their capacity, will be the rightful owners of Paradise, where they will live forever. We will remove any ill feelings from their hearts, and rivers will flow beneath them. They will say, "Praise be to God, who guided us to this. We would not have been guided if God had not guided us. The messengers of our Lord brought the truth." They will hear a voice saying, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

The people of Paradise will call out to the people of the Fire, "We have found our Lord's promises to be true. Have you found your Lord's promises to be true?" They will say, "Yes," and a voice will proclaim, "The curse of God is on the wrongdoers who hinder others from God's path and seek to make it crooked, and who do not believe in the Hereafter."

Between them will be a barrier, and on the heights will be people who recognize everyone by their marks. They will call out to the people of Paradise, "Peace be upon you!" They will not have entered Paradise yet, but they will hope to. When their eyes turn towards the people of the Fire, they will say, "Our Lord, do not place us with the wrongdoers."

The people on the heights will call out to certain men they recognize by their marks, saying, "What good did your hoards and arrogance do you? Are these the ones you swore God would never bless with His mercy? Enter Paradise; no fear will be upon you, nor will you grieve."

The people of the Fire will call out to the people of Paradise, "Pour down some water or anything God has provided for you." They will reply, "God has forbidden both to the disbelievers.""Those who took their religion as mere amusement and were deceived by worldly life will be forgotten by Us today, just as they forgot about this Day and rejected Our signs. We had sent them a Book, explained with knowledge, as a guide and mercy for believers. Are they waiting for the final fulfillment of the event? On that day, those who ignored it will say, 'The messengers of our Lord brought the truth. Do we have any intercessors to help us, or can we be sent back to act differently?' They will realize they have lost their souls, and their inventions will abandon them.

Your Lord is God, who created the heavens and the earth in six days and established Himself on the throne. He covers the night with the day, and created the sun, moon, and stars, all governed by His command. Blessed be God, the Lord of the worlds! Call on your Lord with humility and in private, for He does not love those who exceed limits. Do not cause mischief on the earth after it has been set in order, and call on Him with fear and hope. His mercy is near to those who do good.

He sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, bringing heavy clouds to a dead land, making rain descend and produce every kind of harvest. This is how We will raise the dead, so you may remember. From good land springs rich produce by the will of its Cherisher, but from bad land springs only scanty growth. We explain the signs in various ways for those who are grateful.

We sent Noah to his people, saying, 'O my people! Worship God; you have no other god but Him. I fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day.' The leaders of his people said, 'We see you are clearly in error.' Noah replied, 'O my people! There is no error in me; I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds. I convey the messages of my Lord and give you sincere advice, knowing from God what you do not know. Do you wonder that a reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man from among you, to warn you and so you may receive His mercy?'

But they rejected him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and drowned those who denied Our signs. They were indeed a blind people. To the 'Ad people, We sent Hud, one of their own. He said, 'O my people! Worship God; you have no other god but Him. Will you not fear God?' The leaders of the unbelievers among his people said, 'We see you are an imbecile and a liar.' Hud replied, 'O my people! I am not an imbecile; I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds. I convey the messages of my Lord and am a sincere and trustworthy adviser.'""And I am a faithful adviser to you. Do you find it strange that a message from your Lord has come through a man from among you to warn you? Remember that He made you successors after the people of Noah and gave you stature among the nations. Recall the benefits you have received from God so you may prosper."

They responded, "Have you come to us to worship God alone and abandon what our ancestors worshipped? If you are truthful, bring us what you threaten us with."

He said, "Punishment and wrath have already come upon you from your Lord. Do you argue with me over names you and your ancestors invented without any authority from God? Then wait, I am also waiting with you."

We saved him and those who followed him by Our mercy, and We cut off the roots of those who rejected Our signs and did not believe.

To the Thamud people, We sent Salih, one of their own. He said, "O my people! Worship God; you have no other god but Him. A clear sign has come to you from your Lord. This she-camel of God is a sign for you, so let her graze freely and do not harm her, or you will face a severe punishment."

Remember how He made you successors after the 'Ad people and gave you homes in the land. You build palaces in the plains and carve homes in the mountains. Remember the benefits you have received from God and refrain from evil and mischief on the earth.

The leaders of the arrogant among his people said to those who were considered weak and believed, "Do you know that Salih is a messenger from his Lord?" They replied, "We believe in the message he has been sent with."

The arrogant ones said, "We reject what you believe in."

Then they hamstrung the she-camel and defied the order of their Lord, saying, "O Salih! Bring about your threats if you are truly a messenger."

So the earthquake seized them, and they lay prostrate in their homes by morning.

Salih turned away from them, saying, "O my people! I conveyed my Lord's message to you and gave you good counsel, but you do not love good advisers."

We also sent Lot. He said to his people, "Do you commit lewdness such as no people before you have ever committed? You lust after men instead of women. You are indeed a people transgressing beyond bounds."

His people responded, "Drive them out of your city; they are people who want to be clean and pure!"

But We saved him and his family, except his wife, who was among those who lagged behind.

We rained down on them a shower of brimstone. See what was the end of those who indulged in sin and crime!

To the Madyan people, We sent Shu'aib, one of their own. He said, "O my people! Worship God; you have no other god but Him. A clear sign has come to you from your Lord. Give just measure and weight, do not withhold from people what is rightfully theirs, and do not cause mischief on the earth after it has been set in order. This will be better for you if you have faith."

"And do not squat on every road, threatening and hindering those who believe in God, seeking to make it crooked. Remember how you were few, and He gave you increase. And keep in mind what was the...""Don't lie in wait on every path to threaten travelers and turn people away from God's path, trying to make it crooked. Remember when you were few, and He multiplied you. Consider the fate of those who caused corruption.

If some of you believe in the message I bring and others do not, be patient until God decides between us. He is the best judge.

The arrogant leaders among his people said, 'Shu'aib, we will drive you and those who believe with you out of our city unless you return to our ways.' Shu'aib replied, 'Even if we detest them?'

We would be lying against God if we returned to your ways after He has saved us from them. We cannot return to them unless God wills it. Our Lord knows everything. We trust in God. Our Lord, decide between us and our people with truth, for You are the best judge.

The disbelieving leaders said, 'If you follow Shu'aib, you will be ruined.' But the earthquake took them by surprise, and they lay lifeless in their homes by morning.

Those who denied Shu'aib were as if they had never lived there. They were the losers. Shu'aib turned away from them, saying, 'O my people, I delivered my Lord's messages to you and gave you good advice. How can I grieve for a people who refuse to believe?'

Whenever We sent a prophet to a town, We afflicted its people with suffering and adversity so they might humble themselves. Then We changed their suffering into prosperity until they grew and multiplied, saying, 'Our ancestors also faced suffering and prosperity.' Then We seized them suddenly, while they were unaware.

If the people of the towns had believed and feared God, We would have opened blessings from the heavens and the earth for them. But they rejected the truth, so We punished them for their misdeeds.

Do the people of the towns feel secure from Our punishment coming to them by night while they sleep? Or do they feel secure from it coming in broad daylight while they play? Do they feel secure from God's plan? Only those doomed to ruin feel secure from God's plan.

Is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its previous inhabitants that We could punish them for their sins and seal their hearts so they cannot hear?

These are the towns whose stories We relate to you. Their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they would not believe what they had previously rejected. Thus, God seals the hearts of those who reject faith.

Most of them were not true to their covenant; most of them were rebellious and disobedient.

After them, We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they wrongfully rejected them. See the fate of those who caused corruption."Moses said to Pharaoh, "I am a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds. I must speak only the truth about God. I have come to you with a clear sign from your Lord. Let the Children of Israel go with me."

Pharaoh responded, "If you have a sign, show it to us if you are truthful." Moses then threw his rod, and it turned into a visible serpent. He also drew out his hand, and it appeared white to all who saw it.

The chiefs of Pharaoh's people said, "This is a skilled sorcerer. His plan is to drive you out of your land. What do you advise?" They suggested, "Keep him and his brother in suspense and send for all the skilled sorcerers."

The sorcerers came to Pharaoh and asked, "Will we get a reward if we win?" Pharaoh promised them rewards and positions close to him. They asked Moses, "Will you throw first, or shall we?" Moses told them to throw first. When they did, they cast a spell that bewitched the people's eyes and struck fear into them.

Then God inspired Moses to throw his rod, which swallowed up all the falsehoods. The truth was confirmed, and the sorcerers were defeated and humbled. They fell down in prostration, declaring their belief in the Lord of Moses and Aaron.

Pharaoh said, "You believe in Him before I give you permission? This is a plot to drive out the people of the city. I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides and crucify you all." The sorcerers replied, "We are returning to our Lord. You only take revenge on us because we believed in the signs of our Lord. Our Lord, give us patience and let us die as Muslims."

The chiefs of Pharaoh's people asked, "Will you let Moses and his people spread mischief and abandon you and your gods?" Pharaoh decided to kill their sons and spare their women, asserting his power over them.

Moses told his people to seek help from God and be patient, for the earth belongs to God, and He gives it to whom He wills. The end is best for the righteous. The people complained of their suffering before and after Moses came. Moses reassured them that God might destroy their enemy and make them inheritors of the land to test their deeds.

God punished Pharaoh's people with droughts and crop failures to remind them. When good times came, they claimed it was due to their own efforts. When calamity struck, they blamed it on Moses and his followers. In truth, their misfortune was from God, but most did not understand.

They told Moses, "No matter what signs you bring, we will never believe in you."The people said to Moses, "No matter what signs you bring to charm us, we will not believe in you."

So, We sent plagues upon them: widespread death, locusts, lice, frogs, and blood—clear signs. But they were arrogant and sinful.

Every time a penalty fell on them, they said, "O Moses! Call upon your Lord on our behalf, as He has promised you. If you remove the penalty, we will believe in you and let the Children of Israel go with you."

But when We removed the penalty for a fixed term, they broke their promise.

So, We took retribution and drowned them in the sea because they rejected Our signs and ignored them.

We made the oppressed people inherit the lands in the east and west, which We had blessed. The promise of your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel because they were patient. We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people had built.

We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and they came upon a people devoted to idols. They said, "O Moses! Make for us a god like theirs." Moses replied, "You are ignorant people. Their way will be destroyed, and their worship is in vain."

Moses continued, "Shall I seek a god for you other than God, who has favored you above all others?"

Remember when We rescued you from Pharaoh's people, who inflicted terrible torment on you, killing your sons and sparing your women. That was a great trial from your Lord.

We appointed for Moses thirty nights and added ten more, completing forty nights. Moses told his brother Aaron, "Take my place among the people, do right, and do not follow the way of the mischief-makers."

When Moses came to the appointed place and his Lord spoke to him, he said, "O my Lord! Show Yourself to me so I may look upon You." God replied, "You cannot see Me, but look at the mountain. If it remains firm, then you will see Me." When God revealed His glory to the mountain, it crumbled, and Moses fell unconscious. When he recovered, he said, "Glory be to You! I repent to You, and I am the first to believe."

God said, "O Moses! I have chosen you above others by My messages and My words. Hold firmly to what I have given you and be thankful."

We wrote for him on the tablets instructions and explanations for everything. We said, "Hold firmly to these and command your people to follow the best of them. I will show you the homes of the wicked."

Those who are arrogant on earth without right, I will turn away from My signs. Even if they see all the signs, they will not believe. If they see the way of righteousness, they will not take it, but if they see the way of error, they will adopt it. This is because they have rejected Our signs and ignored them.Those who reject Our signs and the meeting in the Hereafter will find their deeds meaningless. Can they expect any reward other than what they have done?

The people of Moses, in his absence, made a calf from their ornaments for worship. It made a lowing sound, but it could neither speak to them nor guide them. They took it for worship and did wrong.

When they realized their mistake, they said, "If our Lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us, we will surely be among the lost."

When Moses returned to his people, angry and grieved, he said, "What a terrible thing you have done in my absence! Did you hasten the judgment of your Lord?" He threw down the tablets and seized his brother by the hair, dragging him. Aaron said, "Son of my mother! The people considered me weak and almost killed me. Do not let the enemies rejoice over my misfortune, nor count me among the wrongdoers."

Moses prayed, "O my Lord! Forgive me and my brother! Admit us to Your mercy, for You are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy."

Those who took the calf for worship will face wrath from their Lord and shame in this life. This is how We repay those who invent falsehoods.

But those who do wrong and then repent and believe will find their Lord Forgiving and Merciful.

When Moses' anger subsided, he picked up the tablets, which contained guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord.

Moses chose seventy of his people for Our meeting. When they were seized with a violent quaking, he prayed, "O my Lord! If it had been Your will, You could have destroyed them and me long before. Will You destroy us for the deeds of the foolish among us? This is only Your trial. You lead astray whom You will and guide whom You will. You are our Protector, so forgive us and have mercy on us. You are the best of those who forgive."

Moses continued, "Ordain for us what is good in this life and in the Hereafter, for we have turned to You." God replied, "I will punish whom I will, but My mercy encompasses all things. I will ordain it for those who do right, practice regular charity, and believe in Our signs."

Those who follow the messenger, the unlettered Prophet, whom they find mentioned in their scriptures, will prosper. He commands them what is just, forbids what is evil, allows what is good, and prohibits what is bad. He releases them from their heavy burdens and yokes. Those who believe in him, honor him, help him, and follow the light sent down with him will be successful.

Say, "O people! I am sent to you all as the Messenger of God, to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. He gives life and death. So believe in God and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, who believes in God and His words. Follow him so that you may be guided."Among the people of Moses, there was a group who guided others with truth and upheld justice. We divided them into twelve tribes or nations. When Moses' people were thirsty, We inspired him to strike a rock with his staff, and twelve springs gushed forth, each tribe knowing its own drinking place. We provided them with shade from clouds and sent down manna and quails, telling them to eat the good things We provided. However, they rebelled, harming only themselves.

We told them to live in a town, eat as they wished, and enter the gate humbly, promising to forgive their faults and increase the reward for those who do good. But some of them changed the word given to them, so We sent a plague from heaven as punishment for their repeated transgressions.

Ask them about the town by the sea where they broke the Sabbath. On the Sabbath, fish would come to them openly, but on other days, they did not. This was a test for their transgression. When some asked why they preached to people whom God would destroy, the preachers said it was to fulfill their duty to their Lord and perhaps the people might fear Him.

When they ignored the warnings, We rescued those who forbade evil and punished the wrongdoers severely for their transgressions. When they persisted in their disobedience, We said to them, "Be despised apes."

Your Lord declared He would send against them those who would afflict them with severe punishment until the Day of Judgment. Your Lord is swift in retribution but also Forgiving and Merciful. We scattered them into different nations on earth, some righteous and some not. We tested them with both prosperity and adversity so they might return to Us.

After them came a generation that inherited the Book but chose the vanities of this world, thinking they would be forgiven. If similar vanities came their way, they would seize them again. They were supposed to uphold the truth about God, as stated in the Book, and they studied it. The home in the Hereafter is better for the righteous. Do you not understand?

Those who hold fast to the Book and establish regular prayer will not lose their reward. When We shook the Mount over them, they thought it would fall on them. We told them to hold firmly to what We had given them and remember its contents so they might fear God.

When your Lord brought forth from the Children of Adam their descendants and made them testify concerning themselves, saying, "Am I not your Lord?" They said, "Yes, we testify," to prevent them from claiming ignorance on the Day of Judgment.On the Day of Resurrection, people might say, "We were unaware of this." When your Lord brought forth the descendants of Adam and made them testify about themselves, asking, "Am I not your Lord?" They replied, "Yes, we testify," to prevent them from claiming ignorance on Judgment Day.

Or they might say, "Our ancestors worshipped false gods, and we are their descendants. Will You destroy us for what they did?" We explain Our signs in detail so they might return to Us.

Tell them the story of the man to whom We sent Our signs, but he ignored them, and Satan led him astray. If We had willed, We could have elevated him with Our signs, but he clung to the earth and followed his desires. His example is like a dog: whether you chase it away or leave it alone, it pants with its tongue out. This is the example of those who reject Our signs. Tell them this story so they might reflect.

Evil is the example of people who reject Our signs and wrong themselves. Those whom God guides are on the right path, but those He leads astray are the losers. Many jinn and humans are destined for Hell because they have hearts that don't understand, eyes that don't see, and ears that don't hear. They are like cattle, but worse, because they are heedless.

The most beautiful names belong to God, so call on Him by them and avoid those who misuse His names. They will be repaid for what they do. Among those We created are people who guide others with truth and establish justice.

Those who reject Our signs will be gradually punished in ways they don't perceive. I give them time, but My plan is strong. Do they not reflect? Their companion is not mad; he is just a clear warner. Do they not see the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that God has created? Their end might be near. In what message will they believe after this?

Those whom God leads astray have no guide. He leaves them to wander blindly in their defiance. They ask you about the final Hour—when will it come? Say, "The knowledge of it is with my Lord alone. Only He can reveal when it will occur. It is heavy in the heavens and the earth and will come suddenly." They ask as if you are eager to know. Say, "The knowledge of it is with God alone, but most people do not know."

Say, "I have no power over any good or harm to myself except as God wills. If I had knowledge of the unseen, I would have accumulated much good and no evil would have touched me. I am just a warner and a bringer of good news to those who have faith."

He created you from a single person and made his mate of like nature so he might dwell with her in love. When they are united, she bears a light burden and carries it unnoticed. When she grows heavy, they both pray to God, their Lord, saying, "If You give us a good child, we will be grateful." But when He gives them a good child...When God grants them a good child, they attribute part of the gift to others, but God is far above the partners they associate with Him. Do they really attribute to Him partners who create nothing and are themselves created? These partners can't help them or even help themselves. If you call them to guidance, they won't follow; it's the same whether you call them or stay silent. Those you call upon besides God are just like you. Call on them and see if they respond, if you are truthful. Do they have feet to walk, hands to hold, eyes to see, or ears to hear? Say, "Call your partners and plot against me without delay!"

My protector is God, who revealed the Book and befriends the righteous. Those you call upon besides Him can't help you or themselves. If you call them to guidance, they won't hear. You'll see them looking at you, but they don't see. Hold to forgiveness, command what is right, and turn away from the ignorant. If a suggestion from Satan troubles you, seek refuge with God; He hears and knows everything. Those who fear God, when touched by an evil thought from Satan, remember Him and see clearly. But their evil companions plunge them deeper into error and never stop.

If you don't bring them a revelation, they say, "Why haven't you made one up?" Say, "I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord. This is insight, guidance, and mercy for those who believe." When the Qur'an is recited, listen and be silent so you may receive mercy. Remember your Lord humbly and with awe, quietly, in the mornings and evenings, and don't be among the heedless. Those near your Lord are not too proud to worship Him; they praise Him and prostrate before Him.

Chapter 8: AL-ANFAL (SPOILS OF WAR, BOOTY)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

They ask you about the spoils of war. Say, "The spoils belong to God and the Messenger. So fear God, set right your differences, and obey God and His Messenger if you are true believers." True believers are those whose hearts tremble when God is mentioned, whose faith increases when His signs are recited, and who trust in their Lord. They establish regular prayers and spend from what We have provided them. These are the true believers; they have ranks of honor, forgiveness, and generous sustenance from their Lord.

Just as your Lord ordered you out of your house in truth, even though some believers disliked it, they disputed with you about the truth after it was made clear, as if they were being driven to death while they saw it. God promised you one of the two enemy parties, and you wished for the unarmed one, but God willed to justify the truth and cut off the roots of the unbelievers.God wanted to establish the truth and eliminate the disbelievers. When God promised you victory over one of the two enemy groups, you hoped it would be the unarmed one. But God intended to prove the truth and cut off the disbelievers. Even if the guilty dislike it, God will make the truth prevail and falsehood vanish.

Remember when you asked for your Lord's help, and He responded, "I will support you with a thousand angels in succession." God made this a message of hope to reassure your hearts. Victory comes only from God, who is powerful and wise. He sent down rain to cleanse you, remove Satan's influence, and strengthen your hearts and resolve.

When your Lord inspired the angels, saying, "I am with you, so make the believers stand firm. I will instill fear in the hearts of the disbelievers. Strike them above their necks and cut off their fingertips." This is because they opposed God and His Messenger. Whoever opposes God and His Messenger will face severe punishment.

Taste this punishment, for those who resist God will face the penalty of the Fire. Believers, when you face the disbelievers in battle, do not turn your backs on them. If anyone turns their back on such a day, unless maneuvering for battle or joining another group, they incur God's wrath, and their abode will be Hell.

It was not you who killed them, but God. When you threw a handful of dust, it was not your act, but God's, to test the believers. God is all-hearing and all-knowing. God weakens the plans of the disbelievers. If you sought a judgment, it has come to you. If you desist, it will be better for you. If you return to the attack, so will We. Your forces will not help you, no matter how many, for God is with the believers.

Believers, obey God and His Messenger, and do not turn away when you hear him speak. Do not be like those who say, "We hear," but do not listen. The worst creatures in God's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand. If God had found any good in them, He would have made them listen. But even if He made them listen, they would turn away.

Believers, respond to God and His Messenger when He calls you to what gives you life. Know that God comes between a person and their heart, and to Him, you will be gathered. Fear the trial that will not only affect the wrongdoers among you. Know that God is severe in punishment.

Remember when you were few and weak in the land, fearing that people might capture you. God provided you with a safe refuge, strengthened you with His help, and gave you good things so you might be grateful. Believers, do not betray God and the Messenger, nor misappropriate what is entrusted to you knowingly.Believers, do not betray God and His Messenger, nor betray your trusts knowingly. Understand that your possessions and children are a test, and with God lies your greatest reward. If you fear God, He will give you the ability to distinguish right from wrong, remove your sins, and forgive you. God is infinitely gracious.

Remember how the disbelievers plotted against you to imprison, kill, or expel you. They plotted, but God also planned, and He is the best of planners. When Our signs are recited to them, they dismiss them as ancient tales. They even challenged, "O God, if this is the truth from You, rain down stones on us or send a painful punishment." But God would not punish them while you were among them, nor while they sought forgiveness.

What excuse do they have for God not to punish them when they prevent people from the Sacred Mosque, which they are not fit to guard? Only the righteous are its true guardians, but most of them do not understand. Their prayer at the House of God is nothing but whistling and clapping. They will taste the punishment for their disbelief.

Disbelievers spend their wealth to hinder people from God's path. They will continue to spend, but it will only bring them regret and defeat. Ultimately, they will be gathered to Hell. God will separate the impure from the pure, heap the impure together, and cast them into Hell. They are the true losers.

Tell the disbelievers that if they cease their actions, their past will be forgiven. But if they persist, they will face the same fate as those before them. Fight them until there is no more persecution and religion is solely for God. If they cease, God sees all that they do. If they turn away, know that God is your Protector, the best to protect and help.

Know that out of all the war booty you acquire, a fifth is assigned to God, the Messenger, near relatives, orphans, the needy, and travelers, if you believe in God and the revelation sent down on the Day of Testing. God has power over all things.

Remember when you were on one side of the valley and they were on the other, with the caravan below you. Even if you had made an appointment to meet, you would have failed. But God arranged it so that those who were to die would die with clear proof, and those who were to live would live with clear proof. God hears and knows all things.

Remember when God showed them to you as few in your dream. If He had shown them as many, you would have been discouraged and disputed in your decision. But God saved you, for He knows well the secrets of all hearts.When God showed them to you in your dream as few in number, you would have been discouraged if He had shown them as many. But God saved you, for He knows what is in the hearts of people. When you met them, He made them appear few in your eyes and made you seem insignificant in their eyes, so that God could accomplish His plan. All matters return to God for decision.

Believers, when you face an enemy, stand firm and remember God often so that you may succeed. Obey God and His Messenger, and do not argue with each other, or you will lose courage and strength. Be patient, for God is with those who are patient.

Do not be like those who left their homes arrogantly to be seen by people and to prevent others from the path of God. God surrounds all that they do. Remember when Satan made their deeds seem attractive to them and said, "No one can defeat you today, and I am with you." But when the two forces saw each other, he turned back and said, "I am free of you. I see what you do not see. I fear God, for God is severe in punishment."

The hypocrites and those with diseased hearts said, "Their religion has deceived them." But whoever trusts in God will find that God is Mighty and Wise. If you could see when the angels take the souls of the disbelievers, striking their faces and backs, saying, "Taste the punishment of the blazing Fire." This is because of what your hands have sent ahead, for God is not unjust to His servants.

Their deeds are like those of Pharaoh's people and those before them. They rejected God's signs, so God punished them for their sins. God is strong and severe in punishment. God will not change the condition of a people until they change what is within themselves. God hears and knows all things.

Their deeds are like those of Pharaoh's people and those before them. They denied the signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them for their sins and drowned Pharaoh's people. They were all wrongdoers. The worst creatures in God's sight are those who reject Him and will not believe. They are the ones with whom you made a covenant, but they break it every time, and they do not fear God.

If you gain mastery over them in war, deal with them in a way that strikes fear in those who follow them, so they may remember. If you fear treachery from any group, throw back their covenant to them on equal terms. God does not love the treacherous. Let not the disbelievers think they can escape; they cannot.

Prepare whatever force you can, including steeds of war, to strike fear into the enemies of God and your enemies, and others besides them whom you do not know but God knows. Whatever you spend in the cause of God will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged. If the enemy inclines towards peace, you should also incline towards peace and trust in God. He is the Hearer and Knower of all things.If they lean towards peace, then you should also lean towards peace and trust in God. He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. If they try to deceive you, remember that God is enough for you. He has supported you with His help and with the believers. He has united their hearts. Even if you had spent all the wealth on earth, you couldn't have united their hearts, but God did it. He is Mighty and Wise.

O Prophet, God is sufficient for you and the believers who follow you. Encourage the believers to fight. If there are twenty steadfast among you, they will overcome two hundred. If there are a hundred, they will overcome a thousand of the disbelievers because they are people who do not understand. Now, God has lightened your burden because He knows there is weakness in you. If there are a hundred steadfast among you, they will overcome two hundred, and if there are a thousand, they will overcome two thousand by God's permission. God is with those who are patient.

It is not appropriate for a prophet to have prisoners of war until he has thoroughly subdued the land. You desire the temporary goods of this world, but God desires the Hereafter for you. God is Mighty and Wise. If it were not for a prior decree from God, a severe penalty would have reached you for the ransom you took. Now, enjoy what you have taken in war, lawful and good, and fear God. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

O Prophet, tell the captives in your hands that if God finds any good in their hearts, He will give them something better than what was taken from them and will forgive them. God is Forgiving and Merciful. If they intend to betray you, they have already betrayed God before, and He gave you power over them. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

Those who believed, migrated, and fought for the faith with their property and lives, and those who gave them asylum and aid, are friends and protectors of one another. As for those who believed but did not migrate, you owe no duty of protection to them until they migrate. However, if they seek your help in religion, it is your duty to help them, except against a people with whom you have a treaty. God sees all that you do.

The disbelievers are protectors of one another. If you do not do this, there will be turmoil and oppression on earth and great mischief. Those who believe, migrate, and fight for the faith, and those who give them asylum and aid, are the true believers. They will have forgiveness and generous provision. Those who believe later, migrate, and fight for the faith with you are also part of you. Blood relatives have closer ties to each other in the Book of God. God is All-Knowing of all things.

Chapter 9: AL-TAWBA (REPENTANCE, DISPENSATION)

A declaration of immunity from God and His Messenger to the pagans with whom you have made treaties. Travel freely in the land for four months, but know that you cannot escape God and that God will cover with shame those who reject Him.Here is the rephrased content in modern, clear language:

---

Travel freely in the land for four months, but know that you cannot escape God, and He will bring disgrace to the unbelievers. 

An announcement from God and His Messenger to the people on the day of the Great Pilgrimage: God and His Messenger dissolve treaty obligations with the pagans. If you repent, it is better for you, but if you turn away, know that you cannot frustrate God. Announce a severe penalty to those who reject faith.

This is a proclamation from God and His Messenger to all people on the day of the Greater Pilgrimage that God and His Messenger are free from obligations to the idolaters. If you repent, it will be better for you, but if you are averse, know that you cannot escape God. Muhammad, give news of a painful doom to those who disbelieve.

However, the treaties are not dissolved with those pagans with whom you have entered into an alliance and who have not failed you in any way or supported anyone against you. Fulfill your engagements with them until the end of their term, for God loves the righteous.

When the forbidden months are over, fight and slay the pagans wherever you find them, capture them, besiege them, and lie in wait for them in every strategy of war. But if they repent, establish regular prayers, and practice regular charity, then let them go their way. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

If one of the pagans asks for your protection, grant it to him so that he may hear the word of God, and then escort him to a place where he can be secure. This is because they are people without knowledge.

How can there be a treaty with God and His Messenger for the idolaters, except those with whom you made a treaty near the Sacred Mosque? As long as they are true to you, be true to them. God loves the righteous.

How can there be such a treaty when, if they get an advantage over you, they do not respect the ties of kinship or covenant? They entice you with fair words, but their hearts are against you, and most of them are rebellious and wicked.

They have sold the signs of God for a small price and have hindered many from His way. Evil indeed are the deeds they have done.

They do not respect the ties of kinship or covenant with a believer. These are the transgressors.

But if they repent, establish regular prayers, and practice regular charity, they are your brothers in faith. We explain the signs in detail for those who understand.

If they violate their oaths after their covenant and taunt you for your faith, fight the leaders of unfaith, for their oaths mean nothing to them. This is so they may be restrained.

Will you not fight people who violated their oaths, plotted to expel the Messenger, and were the first to assault you? Do you fear them? No, it is God whom you should fear more justly if you believe.

Fight them, and God will punish them by your hands, cover them with shame, help you to victory over them, and heal the hearts of believers.

He will remove the anger from their hearts. God turns in mercy to whom He wills. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

Do you think you will be left alone while God has not yet known those among you who strive with might and main and take none for friends and protectors except God, His Messenger, and the community of believers? God is well-acquainted with all that you do.

It is not for those who join gods with God to visit or maintain the mosques of God while they witness against their own souls to infidelity. Their works bear no fruit, and they will dwell in the Fire.

The mosques of God should be visited and maintained by those who believe in God.

---

This version aims to be more accessible and easier to understand for modern readers.---

Only those who believe in God and the Last Day, establish regular prayers, give to charity, and fear none but God should maintain the mosques of God. These are the ones who are rightly guided.

Do you think providing water to pilgrims and maintaining the Sacred Mosque is equal to the deeds of those who believe in God and the Last Day and strive in His cause? They are not equal in the sight of God. God does not guide those who do wrong.

Those who believe, leave their homes, and strive with their wealth and lives in God's cause have the highest rank in the sight of God. They are the ones who will achieve salvation.

Their Lord gives them good news of mercy from Himself, His good pleasure, and gardens where they will have lasting delights.

They will dwell there forever. Truly, with God, there is a great reward.

O believers, do not take your fathers and brothers as protectors if they prefer disbelief over faith. If any of you do so, they are wrongdoers.

Say: If your fathers, sons, brothers, spouses, relatives, the wealth you have gained, the commerce you fear may decline, or the homes you love are dearer to you than God, His Messenger, and striving in His cause, then wait until God brings about His decision. God does not guide the rebellious.

God has helped you in many battlefields and on the day of Hunain. Your great numbers made you proud, but they did not benefit you. The land, despite its vastness, became narrow for you, and you turned back in retreat.

But God sent down His calm on the Messenger and the believers, and sent forces you could not see. He punished the disbelievers. This is the reward for those without faith.

After this, God will turn in mercy to whom He wills. God is Forgiving, Most Merciful.

O believers, the pagans are unclean, so let them not approach the Sacred Mosque after this year. If you fear poverty, God will enrich you out of His bounty if He wills. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

Fight those who do not believe in God or the Last Day, do not forbid what God and His Messenger have forbidden, and do not follow the religion of truth, even if they are People of the Book, until they pay the Jizya with willing submission and feel subdued.

The Jews say: Ezra is the son of God, and the Christians say: The Messiah is the son of God. These are their words. They imitate the sayings of those who disbelieved before. May God curse them! How they are deluded away from the truth!

They take their priests and monks as lords besides God, and also the Messiah, son of Mary. Yet they were commanded to worship only one God. There is no god but Him. Praise and glory to Him! He is far above what they associate with Him.

They want to extinguish God's light with their mouths, but God will perfect His light, even though the disbelievers detest it.

He is the One who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to proclaim it over all religions, even though the pagans may detest it.

---

This version aims to be more accessible and easier to understand for modern readers.He is the One who sent His Messenger with guidance and the true religion to make it prevail over all other religions, even if the idolaters dislike it.

O believers, many priests and monks exploit people and turn them away from God. Those who hoard gold and silver and do not spend it in God's way will face severe punishment.

On the Day of Judgment, their hoarded wealth will be heated in the fire of Hell and used to brand their foreheads, sides, and backs. They will be told, "This is what you hoarded for yourselves, so taste what you hoarded."

God has ordained twelve months in a year, four of which are sacred. Do not wrong yourselves during these months. Fight the pagans as they fight you, and know that God is with those who are mindful of Him.

Changing the sacred months is an act of disbelief. The disbelievers manipulate the months to suit their desires, making lawful what God has forbidden. Their evil deeds seem pleasing to them, but God does not guide those who reject faith.

O believers, why do you hesitate when you are called to go forth in God's cause? Do you prefer the comforts of this world over the Hereafter? The pleasures of this world are insignificant compared to the Hereafter.

If you do not go forth, God will punish you and replace you with others. You cannot harm Him in any way, for God has power over all things.

If you do not support your leader, remember that God helped him when the disbelievers drove him out. He had only one companion, and they were in the cave. He said to his companion, "Do not grieve, for God is with us." God sent down His peace upon him and supported him with unseen forces, making the disbelievers' word the lowest and God's word the highest. God is Mighty and Wise.

Go forth, whether lightly or heavily armed, and strive with your wealth and lives in God's cause. This is best for you if you only knew.

If the journey had been easy and the gain immediate, they would have followed you. But the distance was long, and they swore by God, "If we could, we would have come with you." They destroy their own souls, for God knows they are lying.

God has forgiven you, Muhammad. Why did you grant them exemption before it was clear who was truthful and who was lying?

Those who believe in God and the Last Day do not ask for exemption from striving with their wealth and lives. God knows those who are mindful of Him.

Only those who do not believe in God and the Last Day ask for exemption. Their hearts are in doubt, and they waver in their doubts.

If they had truly intended to join you, they would have prepared for it. But God was averse to their participation, so He made them lag behind.If they had truly wanted to join you, they would have prepared for it. But God didn't want them to go, so He held them back and told them to stay with those who remain behind. If they had come with you, they would have only caused trouble, spreading discord among you. Some of you would have listened to them, but God knows who does wrong.

They tried to cause problems before and disrupted things until the truth came and God's decree was revealed, even though they disliked it. Some of them say, "Give me permission to stay and don't test me." But they have already fallen into temptation, and Hell surrounds the disbelievers.

If good happens to you, it upsets them; if misfortune befalls you, they say, "We took precautions," and they turn away rejoicing. Say, "Nothing will happen to us except what God has decreed. He is our protector, and believers should trust in Him."

Say, "Can you expect anything for us other than one of two good things (victory or martyrdom)? But we expect that God will punish you, either from Himself or by our hands. So wait, and we will wait with you."

Say, "Spend willingly or unwillingly; it will not be accepted from you because you are rebellious people." The only reason their contributions are not accepted is that they disbelieve in God and His Messenger. They come to prayer lazily and give unwillingly.

Don't be impressed by their wealth or children. God intends to punish them with these things in this life, and their souls will perish while they are disbelievers. They swear by God that they are with you, but they are not; they are afraid. If they could find a place to hide, they would rush to it.

Some of them criticize you about the distribution of alms. If they receive something, they are pleased; if not, they are angry. If only they were content with what God and His Messenger gave them and said, "God is enough for us. He will give us more from His bounty, and we turn our hopes to Him."

Alms are for the poor, the needy, those who collect them, those whose hearts need reconciliation, freeing captives, those in debt, in the cause of God, and for travelers. This is ordained by God, who is all-knowing and wise.

Some people annoy the Prophet and say, "He listens to everything." Say, "He listens to what is best for you. He believes in God, trusts the believers, and is a mercy to those who believe." Those who annoy the Messenger will face a painful punishment.

They swear by God to please you, but it is more fitting that they should please God and His Messenger if they are believers. Don't they know that those who oppose God and His Messenger will face the Fire?Do they not realize that those who oppose God and His Messenger will face the fire of Hell, where they will remain forever? That is the ultimate disgrace.

The hypocrites fear that a revelation will expose what is in their hearts. Tell them, "Mock all you want! God will reveal what you fear."

If you question them, they will say, "We were just joking and having fun." Respond, "Were you mocking God, His signs, and His Messenger?"

Don't make excuses; you have rejected faith after accepting it. If we forgive some of you, others will be punished for their sins.

Hypocrites, both men and women, support each other in wrongdoing. They promote evil, prevent good, and are stingy. They have forgotten God, so He has forgotten them. They are truly rebellious.

God has promised the hypocrites and disbelievers the fire of Hell, where they will stay forever. This is their punishment, and they will face lasting torment.

Just like those before you who were stronger and wealthier, they enjoyed their share of worldly pleasures, and so do you. But their deeds are worthless in this world and the Hereafter, and they are the true losers.

Have they not heard about the people before them—Noah, 'Ad, Thamud, Abraham's people, the people of Midian, and the overthrown cities? Their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they wronged themselves.

Believers, both men and women, are protectors of one another. They promote good, prevent evil, establish prayer, give charity, and obey God and His Messenger. God will have mercy on them, for He is Mighty and Wise.

God has promised believers gardens with rivers flowing beneath, where they will live forever. They will have beautiful homes in these gardens, and the greatest joy will be God's pleasure. This is the ultimate success.

O Prophet, strive hard against the disbelievers and hypocrites and be firm with them. Their final abode is Hell, a terrible destination.

They swear by God that they said nothing wrong, but they did utter blasphemy and disbelieved after accepting Islam. They plotted but failed. If they repent, it will be better for them. If they turn away, God will punish them severely in this life and the Hereafter, and they will have no protector or helper.

Some of them made a promise to God that if He gave them from His bounty, they would give in charity and be righteous. But when He did give them, they became greedy and turned away. So, as a consequence, hypocrisy will remain in their hearts until the Day they meet Him, because they broke their promise to God.Because they lied repeatedly, God has instilled hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet Him. They broke their promise to God and lied.

Don't they know that God is aware of their secret thoughts and private conversations? God knows everything unseen.

Those who mock the believers who give charity, whether they give a lot or a little, will face God's ridicule and a severe punishment.

Whether you ask for their forgiveness or not, even if you ask seventy times, God will not forgive them because they rejected Him and His Messenger. God does not guide rebellious people.

Those who stayed behind during the Tabuk expedition were happy to avoid the effort and danger. They disliked striving with their wealth and lives for God's cause and said, "Don't go out in the heat." Tell them, "The fire of Hell is much hotter." If only they understood!

Let them laugh a little; they will weep much as a consequence of their actions.

If God brings you back to them and they ask to join you, say, "You will never come out with me or fight an enemy with me. You were content to stay behind the first time, so stay with those who lag behind."

Never pray for any of them who dies or stand by their grave. They rejected God and His Messenger and died in a state of rebellion.

Don't be impressed by their wealth or children. God's plan is to punish them with these things in this world and cause their souls to perish in disbelief.

When a revelation instructs them to believe in God and strive with His Messenger, the wealthy among them ask for exemption and say, "Leave us behind with those who stay at home."

They prefer to be with those who remain behind. Their hearts are sealed, so they do not understand.

But the Messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and lives. They will receive all good things and will prosper.

God has prepared gardens with rivers flowing beneath for them, where they will live forever. This is the ultimate success.

Some desert Arabs made excuses and asked for exemption, while others who lied to God and His Messenger stayed inactive. A severe punishment will fall on the disbelievers among them.

There is no blame on the weak, the sick, or those who lack resources if they are sincere to God and His Messenger. There is no ground for complaint against those who do right. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Nor is there blame on those who came to you for mounts, and when you said, "I can't find mounts for you," they turned back with tears of grief because they had no resources.

The blame is on those who seek exemption while being rich. They prefer to stay with those who remain behind. God has sealed their hearts, so they do not understand.Those who ask for permission to stay behind despite being wealthy are content to be with the idle. God has sealed their hearts, so they do not understand.

When you return to them, they will make excuses. Tell them, "Don't bother with excuses; we won't believe you. God has already informed us about you. Your actions will be observed by God and His Messenger, and eventually, you will be brought back to Him who knows everything hidden and visible. He will show you the truth of what you did."

They will swear by God to you when you return, hoping you will leave them alone. Ignore them; they are unclean, and their home is Hell as a fitting punishment for their actions.

They will swear to you to please you, but even if you are pleased with them, God is not pleased with those who disobey.

The desert Arabs are the worst in disbelief and hypocrisy and are most likely to be ignorant of God's commands. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

Some desert Arabs see their contributions as a fine and hope for your misfortune. They will face the disaster they wish upon you. God hears and knows everything.

However, some desert Arabs believe in God and the Last Day and see their contributions as a way to get closer to God and earn the prayers of the Messenger. God will soon admit them to His mercy. God is Forgiving, Most Merciful.

The first to embrace Islam, the Muhajirin and the Ansar, and those who followed them in good deeds, are well-pleased with God, and He is pleased with them. He has prepared gardens with rivers flowing beneath for them, where they will live forever. This is the ultimate success.

Among the desert Arabs and the people of Medina, there are hypocrites who are stubborn in their hypocrisy. You may not know them, but We know them. We will punish them twice, and then they will face a severe penalty.

Others have acknowledged their wrongdoings, mixing good deeds with bad ones. Perhaps God will turn to them in mercy. God is Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Take alms from their wealth to purify and sanctify them, and pray for them. Your prayers are a source of comfort for them. God hears and knows everything.

Don't they know that God accepts repentance and charity from His servants? God is the Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

Tell them to act righteously. God, His Messenger, and the believers will observe their actions. They will be brought back to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, who will inform them of what they did.

Some are held in suspense, awaiting God's command, whether He will punish them or turn to them in mercy. God is All-Knowing, Wise.

There are those who built a mosque to cause harm, disbelief, and disunity among the believers, and as a base for those who previously fought against God and His Messenger. They will swear their intentions are good, but God declares they are liars."to him who previously fought against God and His Messenger. They will swear, 'We only wanted to do good,' but God knows they are liars.

Never stand in that mosque. A mosque founded on piety from the first day is more deserving of your prayers. In it are people who love to purify themselves, and God loves those who purify themselves.

Which is better: someone who builds their foundation on piety and seeking God's pleasure, or someone who builds on the edge of a crumbling cliff that collapses into the fire of Hell? God does not guide those who do wrong.

The building they constructed will always cause doubt in their hearts until their hearts are torn apart. God is All-Knowing, Wise.

God has bought from the believers their lives and wealth in exchange for Paradise. They fight in His cause, kill, and are killed. This is a true promise in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Qur'an. Who is more faithful to His promise than God? Rejoice in the bargain you have made, for it is the ultimate success.

Those who repent, worship, praise, fast, bow down, prostrate, enjoin good, forbid evil, and observe God's limits—give them the good news.

It is not appropriate for the Prophet and the believers to ask for forgiveness for idolaters, even if they are close relatives, after it has become clear that they are destined for Hell.

Abraham prayed for his father's forgiveness only because of a promise he made. But when it became clear that his father was an enemy of God, he disassociated himself from him. Abraham was tender-hearted and patient.

God will not mislead a people after He has guided them until He makes clear to them what they should avoid. God knows all things.

To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and takes it. You have no protector or helper besides Him.

God turned in mercy to the Prophet, the Muhajirin, and the Ansar who followed him in difficult times, even when some hearts almost swerved. He turned to them in mercy, for He is Kind and Merciful.

He also turned in mercy to the three who were left behind. They felt so guilty that the earth seemed to close in on them despite its vastness, and their souls were constricted. They realized there is no refuge from God except in Him. Then He turned to them so they might repent. God is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

O believers, fear God and be with those who are truthful.

It was not appropriate for the people of Medina and the nearby Bedouins to refuse to follow God's Messenger or to prefer their own lives over his. Any suffering they endure—thirst, fatigue, hunger, or any step that angers the disbelievers or any injury from an enemy—is recorded as a good deed. God does not let the reward of those who do good be lost."The people of the desert should not stay behind the Messenger of God or prioritize their own comfort over his mission. Any hardship they face—thirst, fatigue, hunger, or actions that anger the disbelievers—is recorded as a good deed. God does not let the reward of those who do good go to waste.

Whether they spend a little or a lot for the cause, or cross a valley, it is all recorded for them so that God may reward them with the best of what they have done.

Believers should not all go out to fight at once. A group from each community should stay behind to gain knowledge in religion and warn their people when they return, so they may be cautious.

Believers, fight the disbelievers who are near you and let them find firmness in you. Know that God is with those who fear Him.

Whenever a new chapter is revealed, some people ask, "Whose faith has increased because of this?" For those who believe, it strengthens their faith and they rejoice. But for those with a disease in their hearts, it only adds to their doubt, and they die as disbelievers.

Do they not see that they are tested once or twice every year? Yet they do not repent or pay attention.

Whenever a chapter is revealed, they look at each other and ask, "Does anyone see you?" Then they turn away. God has turned their hearts away because they do not understand.

A Messenger has come to you from among yourselves. It grieves him that you should suffer. He is deeply concerned for you and is kind and merciful to the believers.

But if they turn away, say: "God is enough for me. There is no god but Him. I trust in Him, and He is the Lord of the Tremendous Throne."

Chapter 10: YUNUS (JONAH)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

These are the verses of the Wise Book.

Is it surprising to people that We have sent revelation to a man from among themselves to warn mankind and give good news to the believers that they have a high rank with their Lord? The disbelievers say, "This is a clear sorcerer!"

Your Lord is God, who created the heavens and the earth in six days and is firmly established on the Throne, regulating all things. No one can intercede with Him except by His permission. This is God, your Lord, so worship Him. Will you not take heed?

To Him is your return, all of you. This is a true promise from God. He begins creation and then repeats it to reward those who believe and do good deeds with justice. But those who disbelieve will have a drink of boiling fluids and a painful punishment because they rejected Him.

He made the sun a shining light and the moon a reflected light, and determined its phases so you may know the number of years and the reckoning of time. God created this in truth. He explains His signs in detail for those who understand.

In the alternation of night and day and in all that God has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for those who fear Him.

Those who do not hope to meet Us and are satisfied with the life of this world, and those who are heedless of Our signs...Those who don't expect to meet Us and are content with this worldly life, ignoring Our signs, will have the Fire as their home because of their deeds. But those who believe and do good will be guided by their faith, and rivers will flow beneath them in gardens of bliss. Their prayer will be, "Glory to You, O God!" and their greeting will be "Peace." The end of their prayer will be, "Praise be to God, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds!"

If God were to hasten the punishment for people as they wish for good, their time would be up. But He lets those who don't hope to meet Him wander blindly in their wrongdoing. When trouble touches a person, they cry out to Us in all postures—lying down, sitting, or standing. But when We relieve their trouble, they go on as if they never called to Us. This is how the deeds of transgressors seem fair to them.

We destroyed previous generations when they did wrong, even though their messengers came to them with clear signs. This is how We repay those who sin. After them, We made you their successors to see how you would act.

When Our clear signs are recited to them, those who don't hope to meet Us say, "Bring a different Quran or change it." Say, "It's not for me to change it on my own. I only follow what is revealed to me. If I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of a great day."

Say, "If God had willed, I wouldn't have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I lived among you a whole lifetime before this. Don't you understand?" Who does more wrong than someone who invents a lie about God or denies His signs? The guilty will never succeed.

They worship things besides God that can't harm or benefit them and say, "These are our intercessors with God." Say, "Are you informing God of something He doesn't know in the heavens or on earth? Glory to Him! He is far above the partners you ascribe to Him."

Mankind was once one nation, but they later differed. If it weren't for a word from your Lord, their differences would have been settled. They say, "Why isn't a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say, "The unseen is only for God to know. Wait, and I will wait with you."

When We let people taste mercy after adversity, they plot against Our signs. Say, "God is quicker to plan. Our messengers record all your plots." He enables you to travel by land and sea. When you're on ships sailing with a favorable wind, you rejoice. But when a stormy wind comes and waves surround you, you think you're overwhelmed. You cry out to God sincerely, "If You deliver us from this, we will be grateful."

But when He delivers them, they transgress insolently through the earth in defiance of right. O mankind, your insolence will only harm yourselves.Your defiance is only harming yourselves, providing temporary enjoyment in this life. In the end, you will return to Us, and We will show you the truth of all you did. When He delivers them, they unjustly rebel on earth. O mankind, your rebellion is against your own souls, a fleeting enjoyment of this world. Then you will return to Us, and We will inform you of your deeds.

The life of this world is like rain We send from the sky, which mingles with the earth to produce food for people and animals. When the earth is adorned and its people think they control it, Our command comes by night or day, and We make it like a harvested field, as if it had never flourished. This is how We explain Our signs for those who reflect.

God calls to the Home of Peace and guides whom He wills to a straight path. Those who do good will have a great reward, and no darkness or shame will cover their faces. They are the companions of the garden, where they will live forever. But those who do evil will receive a similar punishment, and ignominy will cover their faces. They will have no protector from God, and their faces will be as if covered with the darkness of night. They are the companions of the Fire, where they will live forever.

On the day We gather them all together, We will say to those who joined partners with Us, "Stand back, you and your partners!" We will separate them, and their partners will say, "It was not us that you worshipped." God is enough as a witness between us and you; we were unaware of your worship of us. Every soul will experience the deeds it sent before, and they will be brought back to God, their rightful Lord, and their invented falsehoods will leave them.

Say, "Who sustains you from the sky and the earth? Who controls hearing and sight? Who brings the living from the dead and the dead from the living? Who regulates all affairs?" They will say, "God." Say, "Will you not then show piety to Him?" This is God, your true Lord. After the truth, what remains but error? How then are you turned away?

The word of your Lord is proved true against those who rebel; they will not believe. Say, "Can any of your partners originate creation and repeat it?" Say, "It is God who originates creation and repeats it. How are you then deluded away from the truth?" Say, "Can any of your partners guide to the truth?" Say, "It is God who guides to the truth. Is He who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he who cannot find the way unless he is guided? What is the matter with you? How do you judge?"

Most of them follow nothing but conjecture, and conjecture can never replace the truth. God is well aware of all they do. This Quran is not something that could be produced by anyone other than God. It is a confirmation of previous revelations and a fuller explanation of the Book, with no doubt in it, from the Lord of the worlds. Or do they say, "He forged it"? Say, "Bring then a sura like it, and call to your...Do they claim that you have made it up? Tell them to produce a chapter like it and call upon anyone they can besides God if they are truthful. They deny what they cannot understand and what has not yet been explained to them. This is similar to how those before them denied the truth. Look at the outcome for those who did wrong.

Some of them believe in it, and some do not. Your Lord knows best who are the troublemakers. If they accuse you of lying, say, "My actions are my responsibility, and yours are yours. You are not accountable for what I do, and I am not accountable for what you do."

Among them are those who pretend to listen to you, but can you make the deaf hear, even if they do not understand? And among them are those who look at you, but can you guide the blind, even if they do not see? God does not wrong people; it is people who wrong themselves.

One day, He will gather them together, and it will seem as if they had only stayed for an hour of a day. They will recognize each other. Those who denied meeting with God and refused guidance will be lost. Whether We show you some of what We promise them or take your soul before that, their return is to Us, and God is a witness to what they do.

Every nation had a messenger, and when their messenger came, the matter was judged between them with justice, and they were not wronged. They ask, "When will this promise come to pass if you are truthful?" Say, "I have no power over any harm or benefit to myself except as God wills. Every nation has an appointed time. When their time comes, they cannot delay it nor advance it."

Say, "Do you see if His punishment comes to you by night or by day? What part of it would the sinners wish to hasten?" When it actually happens, will you believe in it? It will be said, "Now? And you wanted to hasten it before?" Then it will be said to the wrongdoers, "Taste the enduring punishment. You get what you earned."

They ask you if it is true. Say, "Yes, by my Lord, it is true, and you cannot escape." Every soul that has sinned would give everything on earth as ransom. They will feel regret when they see the punishment, but the judgment will be fair, and they will not be wronged.

Is it not true that everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God? His promise is assuredly true, but most people do not understand. He gives life and causes death, and to Him, you will be returned.

O mankind, there has come to you a direction from your Lord, a healing for the diseases in your hearts, and for those who believe, guidance and mercy. Say, "In the bounty of God and His mercy, let them rejoice. It is better than what they hoard."

Say, "Do you see what sustenance God has sent down for you? Yet you hold some things forbidden and some things lawful." Say, "Has God indeed permitted you, or do you invent things to attribute to God?""Do you claim that I have made this up? Tell them to produce a chapter like it and call upon anyone they can besides God if they are truthful. They deny what they cannot understand and what has not yet been explained to them. This is similar to how those before them denied the truth. Look at the outcome for those who did wrong.

Some of them believe in it, and some do not. Your Lord knows best who the troublemakers are. If they accuse you of lying, say, 'My actions are my responsibility, and yours are yours. You are not accountable for what I do, and I am not accountable for what you do.'

Among them are those who pretend to listen to you, but can you make the deaf hear, even if they do not understand? And among them are those who look at you, but can you guide the blind, even if they do not see? God does not wrong people; it is people who wrong themselves.

One day, He will gather them together, and it will seem as if they had only stayed for an hour of a day. They will recognize each other. Those who denied meeting with God and refused guidance will be lost. Whether We show you some of what We promise them or take your soul before that, their return is to Us, and God is a witness to what they do.

Every nation had a messenger, and when their messenger came, the matter was judged between them with justice, and they were not wronged. They ask, 'When will this promise come to pass if you are truthful?' Say, 'I have no power over any harm or benefit to myself except as God wills. Every nation has an appointed time. When their time comes, they cannot delay it nor advance it.'

Say, 'Do you see if His punishment comes to you by night or by day? What part of it would the sinners wish to hasten?' When it actually happens, will you believe in it? It will be said, 'Now? And you wanted to hasten it before?' Then it will be said to the wrongdoers, 'Taste the enduring punishment. You get what you earned.'

They ask you if it is true. Say, 'Yes, by my Lord, it is true, and you cannot escape.' Every soul that has sinned would give everything on earth as ransom. They will feel regret when they see the punishment, but the judgment will be fair, and they will not be wronged.

Is it not true that everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God? His promise is assuredly true, but most people do not understand. He gives life and causes death, and to Him, you will be returned.

O mankind, there has come to you a direction from your Lord, a healing for the diseases in your hearts, and for those who believe, guidance and mercy. Say, 'In the bounty of God and His mercy, let them rejoice. It is better than what they hoard.'

Say, 'Do you see what sustenance God has sent down for you? Yet you hold some things forbidden and some things lawful.' Say, 'Has God indeed permitted you, or do you invent things to attribute to God?'

And what do those who invent lies against God think will happen on the Day of Judgment? God is full of bounty to mankind, but most of them are ungrateful. In whatever business you may be, and whatever portion you may be reciting from the Qur'an, and whatever deed you may be doing, We are witnesses when you are deeply engrossed in it. Nothing is hidden from your Lord, not even the weight of an atom on the earth or in heaven. Everything is recorded in a clear record.

Behold! Truly, on the friends of God, there is no fear, nor shall they grieve. Those who believe and constantly guard against evil will have glad tidings in this life and in the Hereafter. There is no changing the words of God. This is indeed the supreme felicity.

Let not their speech grieve you, for all power and honor belong to God. He hears and knows all things. Behold! Truly, to God belong all creatures in the heavens and on earth. What do those who worship as His 'partners' other than God follow? They follow nothing but fancy, and they do nothing but lie.

He is the One who made the night for you to rest and the day to make things visible. Truly, in this are signs for those who listen to His message. They say, 'God has begotten a son!' Glory be to Him! He is self-sufficient! Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him. You have no warrant for this. Do you say about God what you do not know?

Say, 'Those who invent a lie against God will never prosper.' They may have a little enjoyment in this world, but then they will return to Us, and We will make them taste the severest penalty for their blasphemies.

Relate to them the story of Noah. He said to his people, 'O my people, if it is hard on your mind that I should stay with you and commemorate the signs of God, yet I put my trust in God. Get an agreement about your plan and among your partners, so your plan is not dark and dubious. Then pass your sentence on me and give me no respite.'

But if you turn back, consider that I have asked no reward from you. My reward is only due from God, and I have been commanded to be of those who submit to God's will. They rejected him, but We delivered him and those with him in the Ark, and We made them inherit the earth, while We overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected Our signs. Then see what was the end of those who were warned but did not heed.

After him, We sent many messengers to their peoples. They brought them clear signs, but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand. Thus do We seal the hearts of the transgressors.

Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our signs. But they were arrogant and were a people in sin. When the truth came to them from Us, they said, 'This is indeed evident sorcery!' Moses said, 'Do you say this about the truth when it has actually reached you? Is sorcery like this? But sorcerers will not prosper.'

They said, 'Have you come to us to turn us away from the ways we found our fathers following, in order that you and your brother may have greatness in the land? But we shall not believe in you!'"Pharaoh said, "Bring me every skilled magician." When the magicians arrived, Moses told them, "Show what you have." They cast their spells, but Moses declared, "What you have done is mere sorcery. God will nullify it because He does not support the work of mischief-makers." God will establish His truth, even if sinners dislike it.

Only a few of Moses' people believed in him due to fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, who were oppressive. Moses encouraged his people to trust in God if they truly believed. They responded, "We trust in God. Our Lord, protect us from the oppressors and save us from the disbelievers."

God instructed Moses and his brother to provide homes for their people in Egypt, make them places of worship, and establish regular prayers. Moses prayed to God, asking Him to destroy Pharaoh's wealth and harden their hearts so they would not believe until they faced severe punishment. God accepted their prayer and advised them to stay on the right path.

The Children of Israel crossed the sea, but Pharaoh and his army pursued them. When Pharaoh was drowning, he declared his belief in the God of the Children of Israel. However, it was too late, and God saved his body as a sign for future generations. Despite this, many people remain heedless of God's signs.

God settled the Children of Israel in a good place and provided for them, but they fell into disputes after receiving knowledge. God will judge their disagreements on the Day of Judgment. If you doubt what has been revealed, ask those who have read the previous scriptures. The truth has come from your Lord, so do not be among the doubters or rejecters of God's signs, or you will be among the losers.

Those who are destined to disbelieve will not believe, even if they see every sign, until they face severe punishment. No community, except the people of Jonah, believed and benefited from their faith. When they believed, God removed the punishment and allowed them to enjoy their lives for a while.

If God willed, everyone on earth would believe. But you cannot force people to believe against their will."If your Lord had willed, everyone on earth would have believed. Will you then force people to become believers? No soul can believe except by God's will, and He places doubt on those who do not understand. Say: 'Look at what is in the heavens and the earth.' But signs and warnings do not benefit those who do not believe. Are they waiting for the same fate as those who passed away before them? Say: 'Wait then, for I too will wait with you.' In the end, We save Our messengers and those who believe. It is Our duty to save the believers.

Say: 'O people! If you are in doubt about my religion, know that I do not worship what you worship besides God. I worship God, who will take your souls at death, and I am commanded to be among the believers.' Set your face towards true religion and do not be among the unbelievers. Do not call on anyone other than God, for they can neither benefit nor harm you. If God touches you with harm, no one can remove it but Him. If He intends good for you, no one can withhold His favor. He bestows it on whomever He wills among His servants. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

Say: 'O people! The truth has come to you from your Lord. Whoever is guided, is guided for their own good, and whoever goes astray, does so to their own loss. I am not a guardian over you.' Follow what is revealed to you and be patient until God decides, for He is the best of judges.

Chapter 11: HUD

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Alif. Lam. Ra. This is a Book with verses that are clear and detailed, from One who is Wise and Well-Acquainted with all things. Worship none but God. I am sent to you from Him to warn and bring good news. Seek forgiveness from your Lord and turn to Him in repentance. He will grant you good and true enjoyment for a term appointed and bestow His grace on those who deserve it. But if you turn away, I fear for you the penalty of a great day. To God is your return, and He has power over all things.

They try to hide their hearts from Him, but even when they cover themselves with their garments, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal. He knows the secrets of the hearts. There is no creature on earth whose sustenance does not depend on God. He knows its place of rest and its temporary deposit. All is in a clear record.

He created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His Throne was over the waters, to test which of you is best in conduct. If you say, 'You will be raised up after death,' the unbelievers will say, 'This is nothing but obvious sorcery!' If We delay the penalty for them for a definite term, they will say, 'What keeps it back?' On the day it reaches them, nothing will turn it away, and they will be surrounded by what they used to mock at."When people mock the signs, they will be surrounded by what they used to ridicule. If we give someone a taste of our mercy and then take it away, they fall into despair and ingratitude. But if we give them a taste of our favors after hardship, they boast and become prideful. However, those who are patient and do good deeds will receive forgiveness and a great reward.

You might feel inclined to give up part of what has been revealed to you because people question why no treasure or angel has been sent down with you. Remember, you are only a warner, and God is in charge of all things. If they claim you have forged the revelation, challenge them to produce ten chapters like it and call upon anyone they can besides God if they are truthful. If they cannot, know that this revelation is from God, and there is no god but Him. Will you then submit?

Those who seek the pleasures of this world will be repaid for their deeds here, but they will have nothing in the Hereafter except the Fire. Their efforts will be in vain. On the other hand, those who believe, do good deeds, and humble themselves before their Lord will be the rightful owners of the Garden, where they will dwell forever.

The two types of people can be compared to the blind and deaf versus those who can see and hear well. Are they equal? Will you not take heed?

We sent Noah to his people with a clear warning: "Serve none but God. I fear for you the penalty of a grievous day." The leaders among his people, who disbelieved, said, "We see you as nothing but a man like ourselves, and only the lowest among us follow you without thinking. We see no merit in you above us; we think you are liars." Noah replied, "O my people! Consider if I have a clear sign from my Lord and He has sent mercy to me, but it is hidden from your sight. Should we force you to accept it when you are unwilling?"Noah said, "My people, I don't ask you for any wealth in return for my message. My reward is only from God. I won't turn away those who believe; they will meet their Lord, and I see you as ignorant people."

He continued, "Who will help me against God if I drive them away? Won't you take heed? I don't claim to have God's treasures or knowledge of the unseen, nor do I say I'm an angel. I don't say that those you look down upon won't receive good from God. God knows best what's in their hearts. If I did otherwise, I would be unjust."

The people responded, "Noah, you've argued with us for a long time. Bring upon us what you threaten if you're truthful."

Noah replied, "Only God can bring it upon you if He wills, and you can't escape it. My advice won't benefit you if God wills to leave you astray. He is your Lord, and to Him, you will return."

They accused Noah of forging the message. He said, "If I have forged it, the sin is on me, and I'm free of your sins."

It was revealed to Noah that none of his people would believe except those who already had. He was told not to grieve over their actions. God instructed him to build an Ark under divine guidance and not to plead for the wrongdoers, as they would be drowned.

Noah began constructing the Ark, and whenever the leaders passed by, they mocked him. He said, "If you mock us now, we can also mock you. Soon you'll know who will face a shameful punishment and lasting doom."

When the command came, and the earth's fountains gushed forth, Noah was told to take pairs of every species, his family (except those against whom the word had already gone forth), and the believers. Only a few believed with him.

Noah said, "Embark on the Ark in the name of God, whether it moves or rests. My Lord is Forgiving and Merciful."

The Ark sailed amid waves like mountains. Noah called out to his son, who had separated himself, "O my son! Embark with us and don't be with the unbelievers."

His son replied, "I'll take refuge on a mountain to save me from the water." Noah said, "Today, nothing can save from God's command except those on whom He has mercy." A wave came between them, and his son was among the drowned.

Then it was commanded, "O earth, swallow your water, and O sky, withhold your rain." The water receded, the matter was settled, and the Ark rested on Mount Judi. It was said, "Away with the wrongdoers."

Noah called upon his Lord, "O my Lord! My son is of my family, and Your promise is true. You are the Justest of Judges."

God replied, "O Noah! He is not of your family; his conduct is unrighteous. Don't ask Me about things you have no knowledge of. I advise you not to act like the ignorant.""Don't ask Me about things you don't understand. I warn you not to be among the ignorant."

Noah said, "O my Lord! I seek refuge in You from asking about things I don't know. If You don't forgive me and show mercy, I will be lost."

Then it was said, "O Noah! Disembark with peace and blessings from Us upon you and some of the people with you. But there will be other nations whom We will allow to enjoy life for a while, and then a severe punishment will reach them from Us."

These are stories of the unseen that We reveal to you. Neither you nor your people knew them before this. So be patient, for the end is for those who are righteous.

To the people of 'Ad, We sent their brother Hud. He said, "O my people! Worship God; you have no other god but Him. You are just making things up!"

Hud continued, "O my people! I don't ask for any reward for this message. My reward is from the One who created me. Don't you understand?"

"And O my people! Ask forgiveness from your Lord and turn to Him in repentance. He will send you abundant rain and add strength to your strength. Don't turn away as sinners."

They replied, "O Hud! You haven't brought us any clear proof, and we won't abandon our gods just because you say so. We don't believe you."

They said, "We think some of our gods have afflicted you with madness." Hud responded, "I call God to witness, and you too bear witness, that I am free from what you associate with Him."

"Other gods as partners! So plot against me all of you, and give me no respite."

"I put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is no creature that He doesn't control. My Lord is on a straight path."

"If you turn away, I have conveyed the message I was sent with. My Lord will replace you with another people, and you can't harm Him at all. My Lord is the Guardian over all things."

When Our decree came, We saved Hud and those who believed with him by Our mercy. We saved them from a severe punishment.

Such were the people of 'Ad. They rejected the signs of their Lord, disobeyed His messengers, and followed the command of every powerful, obstinate transgressor.

They were pursued by a curse in this life and on the Day of Judgment. The people of 'Ad rejected their Lord. Away with 'Ad, the people of Hud!

To the people of Thamud, We sent their brother Salih. He said, "O my people! Worship God; you have no other god but Him. He brought you forth from the earth and settled you in it. So ask forgiveness from Him and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is near and responsive."

They said, "O Salih! You were a source of hope for us before this. Do you now forbid us from worshipping what our fathers worshipped? We are in serious doubt about what you are calling us to."

Salih replied, "O my people! Think about it. If I have clear proof from my Lord and He has granted me mercy, who can help me against God if I disobey Him? You would only add to my loss."Salih continued, "O my people! This she-camel is a sign from God for you. Let her graze freely on God's land and do not harm her, or a swift punishment will come upon you."

But they harmed the camel. So Salih warned them, "Enjoy yourselves in your homes for three more days. This is a promise that will not be broken."

When Our decree came, We saved Salih and those who believed with him by Our mercy, protecting them from the disgrace of that day. Your Lord is indeed strong and mighty.

The wrongdoers were struck by a mighty blast, and they lay lifeless in their homes by morning, as if they had never lived there. The people of Thamud rejected their Lord, and they were removed from sight.

Our messengers brought good news to Abraham. They greeted him with "Peace!" and he responded with "Peace!" and quickly brought them a roasted calf.

When he saw they did not eat, he felt uneasy and afraid of them. They reassured him, "Do not fear. We have been sent to the people of Lot."

His wife, standing nearby, laughed, and We gave her the good news of Isaac and, after Isaac, Jacob. She exclaimed, "How can I bear a child when I am an old woman and my husband is also old? This is truly amazing!"

They replied, "Do you wonder at God's decree? God's mercy and blessings are upon you, O people of the house. He is indeed worthy of all praise and glory."

When Abraham's fear subsided and the good news reached him, he began to plead with Us for the people of Lot. Abraham was indeed forbearing, compassionate, and always turning to God.

We said, "O Abraham! Do not plead for them. Your Lord's decree has been issued, and an irreversible punishment is coming to them."

When Our messengers came to Lot, he was distressed and felt powerless to protect them. He said, "This is a distressful day."

His people rushed towards him, already accustomed to committing abominations. Lot said, "O my people! Here are my daughters; they are purer for you. Fear God and do not disgrace me with my guests. Is there not a single right-minded man among you?"

They replied, "You know well that we have no need of your daughters. You know what we want."

Lot said, "If only I had the strength to resist you or could rely on some strong support."

The messengers said, "O Lot! We are messengers from your Lord. They will not reach you. Leave with your family during the night and do not look back, except for your wife. She will face the same fate as the others. Their appointed time is the morning. Is not the morning near?"

When Our decree came, We turned the cities upside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay, layer upon layer, marked by your Lord. Such punishment is never far from the wrongdoers.

To the people of Midian, We sent their brother Shu'aib. He said, "O my people! Worship God; you have no other god but Him. Do not give short measure or weight. I see you in prosperity, but I fear for you the penalty of a day that will encompass you all around."Shu'aib said, "My people, worship God; you have no other god but Him. Do not cheat in measurements and weights. I see you are prosperous, but I fear a day of punishment that will surround you."

He continued, "Give fair measure and weight, and do not withhold what is due to people. Do not commit evil or cause corruption in the land. What remains with God is better for you if you believe. I am not here to watch over you."

The people responded, "Shu'aib, does your prayer command us to abandon what our ancestors worshipped or to stop doing what we want with our property? You are indeed patient and right-minded!"

Shu'aib replied, "My people, consider if I have clear evidence from my Lord and He has provided me with good sustenance. I do not wish to do what I forbid you from doing. I only seek to improve things as much as I can. My success comes from God alone. I trust in Him and turn to Him."

He warned, "My people, do not let your opposition to me lead you to sin, or you will face a fate similar to the people of Noah, Hud, Salih, or Lot. Ask forgiveness from your Lord and turn to Him. My Lord is merciful and loving."

The people said, "Shu'aib, we do not understand much of what you say. We see you as weak among us. If it were not for your family, we would have stoned you, for you have no great position among us."

Shu'aib responded, "My people, is my family more important to you than God? You have cast Him aside. My Lord encompasses all that you do. Do whatever you can, and I will do my part. Soon you will know who will face a humiliating punishment and who is a liar. Watch, for I am also watching with you."

When Our decree came, We saved Shu'aib and those who believed with him by Our mercy. The wrongdoers were seized by a mighty blast and lay lifeless in their homes by morning, as if they had never lived there. The people of Midian were removed from sight, just like the people of Thamud.

We sent Moses with Our clear signs and authority to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they followed Pharaoh's command, which was not a right guide. On the Day of Judgment, Pharaoh will lead his people into the Fire. They are followed by a curse in this life and on the Day of Judgment. What a terrible gift they will receive!

These are some of the stories of past communities. Some of them still stand, while others have been destroyed. We did not wrong them; they wronged themselves. Their gods, whom they invoked besides God, did not help them when Our decree came. They only added to their ruin.

Such is the punishment of your Lord when He punishes communities in the midst of their wrongdoing. His punishment is severe and painful. This is a sign for those who fear the penalty of the Hereafter. That is a day when all mankind will be gathered together, a Day of Testimony.This is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the Hereafter. It is a day when all people will be gathered together, a day that will be witnessed by all.

We will not delay it beyond its appointed time. When that day arrives, no soul will speak except by His permission. Some will be wretched, and others will be blessed.

Those who are wretched will be in the Fire, where they will sigh and sob. They will remain there as long as the heavens and the earth endure, unless your Lord wills otherwise. Your Lord accomplishes what He plans.

Those who are blessed will be in the Garden, where they will dwell forever, as long as the heavens and the earth endure, unless your Lord wills otherwise. It is an unfailing gift.

Do not doubt what these people worship. They worship what their ancestors worshipped before them. We will repay them in full without any reduction.

We gave the Book to Moses, but there were disputes about it. If it were not for a word from your Lord, the matter would have been settled between them. They are in grave doubt about it.

Your Lord will repay everyone in full for their deeds. He knows well what they do.

So, stay on the straight path as you are commanded, along with those who turn to God with you. Do not transgress, for He sees everything you do.

Do not incline towards those who do wrong, or the Fire will touch you. You have no protectors other than God, and you will not be helped.

Establish regular prayers at both ends of the day and during the night. Good deeds remove evil deeds. This is a reminder for those who remember.

Be patient, for God does not let the reward of the righteous perish.

Why were there not, among the generations before you, people with good sense who would forbid mischief on earth? Only a few of those whom We saved did so. The wrongdoers pursued the enjoyment of life and persisted in sin.

Your Lord would not destroy communities for a single wrongdoing if its members were likely to mend.

If your Lord had willed, He could have made mankind one people, but they will continue to dispute, except those on whom your Lord has bestowed His mercy. For this, He created them. The word of your Lord will be fulfilled: "I will fill Hell with jinn and men all together."

All the stories of the messengers that We relate to you are to strengthen your heart. In them, you find the truth, an exhortation, and a reminder for believers.

Say to those who do not believe: "Do whatever you can; we will do our part. Wait, and we too shall wait."

To God belong the unseen secrets of the heavens and the earth. Every affair returns to Him for decision. Worship Him and put your trust in Him. Your Lord is not unmindful of what you do.

Chapter 12: YUSUF (JOSEPH)
Total Verses: 111
Revealed At: MAKKA

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

A.L.R. These are the verses of the clear Book.

We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur'an so that you may understand.Chapter 12: YUSUF (JOSEPH)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

A.L.R. These are the verses of the clear Book.

We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur'an so that you may understand.

We narrate to you the best of stories through Our revelation of this Qur'an, even though before this you were unaware of them.

Joseph said to his father, "O my father, I saw in a dream eleven stars, the sun, and the moon; I saw them prostrating to me."

His father replied, "My dear son, do not tell your brothers about your dream, or they will plot against you. Indeed, Satan is a clear enemy to man."

He continued, "Thus your Lord will choose you, teach you the interpretation of dreams, and perfect His favor upon you and the descendants of Jacob, just as He perfected it upon your forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Indeed, your Lord is All-Knowing, All-Wise."

In the story of Joseph and his brothers, there are signs for those who seek the truth.

The brothers said, "Joseph and his brother are more loved by our father than we are, even though we are a strong group. Our father is clearly mistaken."

One of them suggested, "Kill Joseph or cast him out to some distant land so that our father's attention will be only on us. After that, we can become righteous people."

Another brother said, "Do not kill Joseph. Instead, throw him into the bottom of a well; some travelers will pick him up if you must do something."

They said to their father, "O our father, why do you not trust us with Joseph? We are indeed his sincere well-wishers."

"Send him with us tomorrow so he can enjoy himself and play. We will take good care of him."

Jacob replied, "It truly saddens me that you should take him away. I fear that a wolf might devour him while you are not paying attention."

They said, "If a wolf were to devour him while we are such a large group, then we would indeed be losers."

So they took Joseph away and agreed to throw him into the bottom of the well. We inspired him, "You will surely inform them of this affair of theirs while they do not perceive it."

They returned to their father in the evening, weeping.

They said, "O our father, we went racing with one another and left Joseph with our things, and the wolf devoured him. But you will not believe us even though we are telling the truth."

They brought his shirt stained with false blood. Jacob said, "No, your minds have made up a tale. Patience is most fitting for me. Against what you assert, it is God alone whose help can be sought."

Then a caravan of travelers came by. They sent their water-carrier, who let down his bucket into the well. He exclaimed, "Good news! Here is a young man!" They concealed him as a treasure, but God knew well what they did.

They sold him for a low price, a few silver coins, and they did not value him much.

The man in Egypt who bought him said to his wife, "Make his stay honorable. Perhaps he will be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." Thus, We established Joseph in the land so that We might teach him the interpretation of events. God has full power over His affairs, but most people do not know.

When Joseph reached his full manhood, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus, We reward those who do good.

The woman in whose house he was living tried to seduce him. She locked the doors and said, "Come to me." He replied, "God forbid! Truly, your husband is my master and has made my stay agreeable. Indeed, wrongdoers never succeed."The woman in whose house Joseph lived tried to seduce him. She locked the doors and said, "Come to me." Joseph replied, "I seek refuge in God! Your husband has treated me well. Wrongdoers never succeed."

She desired him, and he might have desired her if he hadn't seen a sign from his Lord. This was to keep him away from evil and shameful deeds, for he was one of God's sincere servants.

They both ran to the door, and she tore his shirt from the back. They found her husband at the door. She said, "What should be the punishment for someone who tried to harm your wife? Prison or a severe punishment?"

Joseph said, "It was she who tried to seduce me." A witness from her family testified, "If his shirt is torn from the front, she is telling the truth, and he is lying. But if it is torn from the back, she is lying, and he is telling the truth."

When her husband saw that Joseph's shirt was torn from the back, he said, "This is a trick of you women. Your tricks are indeed great. Joseph, ignore this. And you, my wife, ask forgiveness for your sin. You are indeed at fault."

The women in the city gossiped, "The wife of the 'Aziz is trying to seduce her slave. She is deeply in love with him. We see she is clearly going astray."

When she heard their gossip, she invited them to a banquet. She gave each of them a knife and said to Joseph, "Come out before them." When they saw him, they were so amazed that they cut their hands and said, "This is not a human being; this is a noble angel!"

She said, "This is the man you blamed me for. I tried to seduce him, but he resisted. If he doesn't do what I command, he will be imprisoned and humiliated."

Joseph prayed, "My Lord, I prefer prison over what they invite me to. If You don't turn their tricks away from me, I might be inclined towards them and become one of the ignorant."

So his Lord answered his prayer and turned their tricks away from him. He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.

Despite seeing the signs of his innocence, they decided to imprison him for a while.

Two young men entered the prison with him. One said, "I dreamed I was pressing wine." The other said, "I dreamed I was carrying bread on my head, and birds were eating from it. Tell us the meaning of these dreams, for we see you are a good person."

Joseph said, "I will tell you the meaning before your next meal arrives. This is part of what my Lord has taught me. I have abandoned the ways of people who do not believe in God and deny the Hereafter. I follow the religion of my fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We never attribute any partners to God. This is God's grace upon us and mankind, but most people are not grateful.

"O my fellow prisoners, are many different lords better, or God, the One, the Supreme?""Are many different lords better, or God, the One, the Supreme? You worship nothing but names you and your ancestors have invented, for which God has sent no authority. The command belongs to God alone. He has commanded that you worship none but Him. This is the right religion, but most people do not understand."

Joseph continued, "O my fellow prisoners, as for one of you, he will serve wine to his master. The other will be crucified, and birds will eat from his head. This is the interpretation of your dreams."

Joseph then told the one who would be released, "Mention me to your master." But Satan made him forget, and Joseph remained in prison for several more years.

The king of Egypt had a dream of seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean cows, and seven green ears of corn and seven withered ones. He asked his advisors to interpret it, but they couldn't. The man who had been released from prison remembered Joseph and suggested they consult him.

The man went to Joseph and asked him to interpret the king's dream. Joseph explained, "You will have seven years of abundant harvests. Store the surplus, because seven years of famine will follow. After that, there will be a year of abundant rain and crops."

The king ordered Joseph to be brought to him. When the messenger arrived, Joseph asked him to inquire about the women who had cut their hands, to clear his name. The king questioned the women, and they admitted Joseph's innocence. The wife of the 'Aziz confessed that she had tried to seduce Joseph.

Joseph said, "I wanted my master to know I did not betray him in his absence. I do not claim to be perfect, for the human soul is prone to evil unless my Lord bestows His mercy. My Lord is Forgiving and Merciful."

The king then summoned Joseph and appointed him to a high position, recognizing his integrity and wisdom. Joseph requested to be in charge of the storehouses of the land, promising to manage them wisely.

Thus, Joseph was given power in Egypt, and he managed the resources as he saw fit. God's mercy was upon him, and He does not let the reward of the righteous go to waste. The reward of the Hereafter is even better for those who believe and are righteous.The reward of the Hereafter is far better for those who believe and avoid evil. 

Joseph's brothers came to him, but they didn't recognize him, though he knew them. After providing them with provisions, Joseph asked them to bring their younger brother next time, promising full measure and the best hospitality. He warned that if they didn't bring their brother, they wouldn't receive any more provisions.

The brothers agreed to try to convince their father to let their younger brother come with them. Joseph secretly instructed his servants to return their payment in their bags, hoping they would come back.

When the brothers returned home, they told their father about the situation and found their payment returned. They asked their father to send their younger brother with them, promising to take good care of him. Their father, Jacob, was hesitant, recalling how he had lost Joseph before. He finally agreed, making them swear by God to bring their brother back unless they were overpowered.

Jacob advised his sons to enter the city through different gates, acknowledging that only God's will prevails. When they followed his advice, it didn't change God's plan, but it satisfied Jacob's concern. Jacob had knowledge given by God, though most people didn't understand.

When the brothers returned to Joseph, he revealed his identity to his full brother and reassured him. Joseph then devised a plan to keep his brother with him by placing a royal cup in his brother's bag. When the cup was discovered, the brothers were accused of theft. They protested their innocence, but the penalty for the theft was that the person in whose bag the cup was found would become a bondman. Joseph began searching their bags and found the cup in his brother's bag, thus ensuring his brother stayed with him.Joseph began searching their bags, starting with the others before his brother's. He found the cup in his brother's bag, which was part of God's plan to keep his brother with him. Joseph couldn't have taken his brother under the king's law unless God willed it. God elevates whom He pleases, and above everyone with knowledge is the All-Knowing.

The brothers said, "If he steals, his brother stole before." Joseph kept this to himself and didn't reveal it to them, thinking, "You are in a worse situation, and God knows best the truth of what you claim."

They pleaded, "O ruler, he has an elderly father who will grieve for him. Take one of us instead, for we see you are kind." Joseph replied, "God forbid that we take anyone other than the one with whom we found our property; otherwise, we would be unjust."

When they saw no hope, they privately conferred. The eldest said, "Remember how our father made us swear by God and how we failed with Joseph before? I will not leave this land until my father permits or God decides for me. He is the best judge."

They returned to their father and said, "O our father, your son committed theft. We testify only to what we know and couldn't guard against the unseen. Ask the town where we were and the caravan we traveled with; we are telling the truth."

Jacob said, "No, your minds have made up a story. Patience is best for me. Maybe God will bring them all back to me. He is the All-Knowing, the Wise." He turned away and said, "How great is my grief for Joseph!" His eyes became white with sorrow, and he fell into silent melancholy.

The brothers said, "By God, you will never stop remembering Joseph until you are severely ill or dead!" Jacob replied, "I only complain of my distraction and anguish to God, and I know from God what you do not know. O my sons, go and inquire about Joseph and his brother, and never give up hope in God's mercy. Only those who have no faith despair of God's mercy."

When they returned to Joseph, they said, "O exalted one, distress has seized us and our family. We have brought scanty capital, so please give us full measure and treat it as charity. God rewards the charitable." Joseph asked, "Do you remember what you did to Joseph and his brother when you were ignorant?" They replied, "Are you indeed Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and this is my brother. God has been gracious to us. Whoever is righteous and patient, God will not let their reward be lost."

They said, "By God, indeed God has preferred you above us, and we were guilty of sin." Joseph said, "No reproach on you today. May God forgive you; He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy. Take my shirt and cast it over my father's face; he will regain his sight. Then bring your whole family to me."

When the caravan left Egypt, their father said, "I sense the presence of Joseph. Don't think me a dotard."Their father said, "I can sense the presence of Joseph, even if you think I'm losing my mind." 

They replied, "By God, you are still in your old delusion."

When the bearer of good news arrived, he placed the shirt on Jacob's face, and Jacob's sight was restored. Jacob said, "Didn't I tell you that I know from God what you do not?"

The brothers then said, "Father, ask God to forgive our sins; we were truly wrong."

Jacob responded, "I will soon ask my Lord for forgiveness for you. He is indeed the Most Forgiving, Most Merciful."

When they entered Joseph's presence, he welcomed his parents and said, "Enter Egypt in safety, if God wills."

Joseph then raised his parents to a high place of honor, and they all bowed down before him. He said, "Father, this is the fulfillment of my earlier vision. God has made it come true. He was kind to me when He freed me from prison and brought you all here from the desert, even after Satan caused conflict between me and my brothers. My Lord understands best and is full of knowledge and wisdom."

Joseph prayed, "My Lord, You have given me some power and taught me the interpretation of dreams. Creator of the heavens and the earth, You are my Protector in this world and the Hereafter. Let me die as one who submits to Your will and join me with the righteous."

This is one of the stories of the unseen that We reveal to you, Muhammad. You were not present when they plotted together.

Even though you desire it, most people will not believe.

You do not ask them for any reward for this message; it is a reminder for all humanity.

How many signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by, yet they turn away from them?

Most of them do not believe in God without associating others with Him.

Do they feel secure from the coming of God's punishment or the sudden arrival of the Hour while they are unaware?

Say, "This is my way: I call to God with clear evidence, I and those who follow me. Glory to God! I am not one of the polytheists."

We sent messengers before you, Muhammad, who were men living in human habitations. Have they not traveled through the earth and seen the end of those before them? The home of the Hereafter is best for those who do right. Will you not then understand?

When the messengers despaired and thought they were denied, Our help reached them, and those We willed were delivered. Our punishment cannot be averted from the guilty.

In their stories, there is a lesson for people of understanding. It is not an invented tale but a confirmation of what came before, a detailed explanation of everything, and a guide and mercy for those who believe.

Chapter 13: The Thunder

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

A.L.M.R. These are the verses of the Book. What has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, but most people do not believe.

God is the One who raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see and is firmly established on the throne of authority. He has subjected the sun and the moon to His law; each runs its course for a term appointed. He regulates all affairs.God is the one who spread out the earth and placed mountains and rivers on it. He created all kinds of fruits in pairs and covers the night with the day. These are signs for those who reflect.

On earth, there are different regions, gardens of vines, fields of corn, and palm trees, some growing from a single root and others from separate roots. They are all watered with the same water, yet some are made better than others to eat. These are signs for those who understand.

If you are amazed, then their statement is truly strange: "When we are dust, will we be created anew?" These are the ones who deny their Lord, and they will have chains around their necks and be the companions of the Fire, where they will remain forever.

They ask you to hasten the punishment rather than the good, even though there have been many exemplary punishments before them. But your Lord is full of forgiveness for humanity despite their wrongdoing, and He is also strict in punishment.

The disbelievers say, "Why hasn't a sign been sent down to him from his Lord?" You are only a warner, and there is a guide for every people.

God knows what every female bears and what the wombs fall short of or exceed. Everything is measured with Him. He knows the unseen and the seen; He is the Great, the Most High.

It is the same to Him whether you conceal your speech or declare it openly, whether you hide by night or walk freely by day. For each person, there are angels in succession, guarding them by God's command. God does not change a people's condition unless they change what is in their hearts. When God wills a people's punishment, there is no turning it back, and they will find no protector besides Him.

He shows you the lightning, causing fear and hope, and raises the heavy clouds. The thunder praises Him, and so do the angels out of awe. He sends the thunderbolts and strikes with them whom He wills, yet they dispute about God, and He is mighty in power.

To Him alone is the true prayer. Those they call upon besides Him do not respond to them at all, like someone stretching out their hands to water that never reaches their mouth. The prayer of disbelievers goes astray.

Whatever beings are in the heavens and the earth prostrate themselves to God, willingly or unwillingly, and so do their shadows in the morning and evening.

Say, "Who is the Lord and Sustainer of the heavens and the earth?" Say, "It is God." Say, "Do you then take protectors other than Him, who have no power either for good or harm to themselves?" Say, "Are the blind equal to those who see? Or is darkness equal to light?" Or do they assign partners to God who have created anything like His creation, so that the creation seemed similar to them? Say, "God is the Creator of all things; He is the One, the Supreme and Irresistible."God is the Creator of everything and the Almighty. Say: Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth? Say: God. Do you take protectors other than Him, who have no power to benefit or harm themselves? Are the blind and the seeing alike? Can darkness and light be equal? Or do they assign partners to God who have created anything like His creation, making it seem similar to them? Say: God is the Creator of all things, and He is the Supreme and Irresistible.

He sends down water from the sky, and the channels flow according to their measure. The torrent carries foam on its surface, just like the scum that rises from what they melt in the fire to make ornaments or tools. This is how God shows the difference between truth and falsehood. The scum disappears, but what benefits people remains on the earth. This is how God sets forth parables.

For those who respond to their Lord, there are good things. But for those who do not respond, even if they had all that is in the heavens and the earth, they would offer it as a ransom. They will face a terrible reckoning, and their abode will be Hell, a miserable place.

Is the one who knows that what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth like the one who is blind? Only those with understanding will take heed. Those who fulfill God's covenant and do not break their promises, who join what God has commanded to be joined, and who fear their Lord and the terrible reckoning, will be rewarded.

Those who patiently persevere, seeking their Lord's pleasure, establish regular prayers, spend from what We have provided them, both secretly and openly, and repel evil with good, will have the final attainment of the eternal home. They will enter gardens of perpetual bliss, along with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and offspring. Angels will enter upon them from every gate, saying: "Peace be upon you for your patience! How excellent is the final home!"

But those who break God's covenant after confirming it, sever what God has commanded to be joined, and cause mischief on the earth, will face a curse and a terrible home. God enlarges or restricts sustenance for whom He pleases. They rejoice in the life of this world, but the life of this world is nothing compared to the Hereafter, which is only temporary enjoyment.

The disbelievers say: "Why hasn't a sign been sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "God leaves astray whom He wills and guides to Himself those who turn to Him in repentance." Those who believe and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of God, for without doubt, in the remembrance of God, do hearts find satisfaction. For those who believe and do righteous deeds, there is every blessedness and a beautiful place of return.

Thus, We have sent you among a people before whom other nations have passed away, so you may recite to them what We have revealed to you. Yet, they deny the Most Gracious. Say: "He is my Lord; there is no god but He. On Him, I trust, and to Him, I turn." If there were a Qur'an with which mountains could be moved, the earth split asunder, or the dead made to speak, it would be this one. But the command is with God in all things. Do not the believers know that if God willed, He could have guided all mankind? But the disbelievers will continue to face disasters for their deeds, or disasters will settle close to their homes, until God's promise comes to pass. God will not fail in His promise."Disasters will continue to strike those who disbelieve because of their actions, or they will occur near their homes until God's promise is fulfilled. God never fails to keep His promise. Even if there were a Quran that could move mountains, split the earth, or make the dead speak, the command is entirely with God. Don't the believers know that if God willed, He could guide all people? But the disbelievers will keep facing calamities for their deeds until God's promise comes true. God never fails in His promise.

Many messengers before you were mocked, but I gave the disbelievers time before punishing them. How terrible was My punishment! God watches over every soul and knows all their actions. Yet, they assign partners to God. Say: 'Name them! Are you informing Him of something He doesn't know on earth, or is it just empty words?' Their false beliefs seem pleasing to them, but they are kept from the right path. Those whom God leaves astray have no guide.

For them, there is punishment in this world, but the punishment of the Hereafter is even worse, and they have no protector against God. The parable of the Garden promised to the righteous: beneath it flow rivers, and its enjoyment and shade are perpetual. This is the reward for those who are righteous, while the reward for disbelievers is the Fire.

Those who received the Book rejoice in what has been revealed to you, but some among the clans reject parts of it. Say: 'I am commanded to worship God and not to associate anything with Him. To Him, I call, and to Him is my return.' We have revealed it as a decisive judgment in Arabic. If you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, you will have no protector or defender against God.

We sent messengers before you and gave them wives and children. No messenger could bring a sign except by God's permission. For every period, there is a Book revealed. God blots out or confirms what He pleases, and with Him is the source of all decrees. Whether We show you part of what We promise them or take your soul before it happens, your duty is to convey the message, and it is Our part to call them to account.

Don't they see that We gradually reduce the land from its outlying borders? When God commands, no one can put back His command, and He is swift in calling to account. Those before them also devised plots, but all planning is God's. He knows what every soul earns, and soon the disbelievers will know who gets the final home.

The disbelievers say: 'You are not a messenger.' Say: 'God is sufficient as a witness between me and you, and so are those who have knowledge of the Book.'

Chapter 14: IBRAHIM (ABRAHAM)
In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

A. L. R. This is a Book We have revealed to you so that you may lead mankind out of darkness into light, by the permission of their Lord, to the path of the Mighty, the Praised One. God, to whom belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. Woe to the disbelievers for a terrible punishment. Those who love the life of this world more than the Hereafter, who hinder others from the path of God and seek to make it crooked, are far astray."People who love this world more than the afterlife and turn others away from God's path are deeply misguided. 

We sent messengers to speak the language of their people to make the message clear. God guides or leads astray whom He wills, and He is all-powerful and wise.

We sent Moses with our signs, telling him to lead his people from darkness into light and remind them of God's days. There are signs in this for those who are patient and grateful.

Moses told his people to remember God's favor when He saved them from Pharaoh's torment, where their sons were killed, and their women were spared. This was a great trial from God.

God proclaimed that if you are grateful, He will give you more, but if you are ungrateful, His punishment is severe.

Moses said that even if everyone on earth is ungrateful, God is self-sufficient and praiseworthy.

Have you heard the stories of those before you, like the people of Noah, 'Ad, and Thamud? Their messengers came with clear signs, but they rejected them and doubted their message.

The messengers asked if there could be any doubt about God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth. He invites you to forgive your sins and give you respite. The people replied that the messengers were just humans like them and demanded clear authority.

The messengers said they were indeed human but that God grants His grace to whom He pleases. They could not bring any authority except by God's permission, and believers should trust in God.

The messengers said they had no reason not to trust in God, who guided them. They would endure the harm caused by others and put their trust in God.

The disbelievers threatened to drive the messengers out of their land unless they returned to their old religion. God revealed to the messengers that He would destroy the wrongdoers and make the believers inherit the land. This promise is for those who fear standing before God and His punishment.

The disbelievers sought victory, but every arrogant transgressor was frustrated. Hell awaits them, and they will be given boiling, fetid water to drink, which they will sip but cannot swallow. Death will come from every side, but they will not die, and severe punishment awaits them.

The actions of those who reject their Lord are like ashes blown away by the wind on a stormy day. They have no control over what they have earned, and this is a great error.

Don't you see that God created the heavens and the earth with truth? If He wills, He can remove you and replace you with a new creation.Do you not see that God created the heavens and the earth with purpose? If He wills, He can remove you and bring forth a new creation. This is not difficult for God.

On the Day of Judgment, everyone will be gathered before God. The weak will say to the arrogant, "We followed you; can you help us against God's wrath?" The arrogant will reply, "If God had guided us, we would have guided you. Now, it makes no difference whether we are patient or impatient; there is no escape for us."

Satan will say, "God promised you the truth, and I promised you but failed. I had no power over you except to call you, and you responded. So do not blame me, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I reject your previous act of associating me with God. Wrongdoers will face a severe punishment."

But those who believe and do good deeds will enter gardens with rivers flowing beneath, where they will stay forever with their Lord's permission. Their greeting will be "Peace."

God sets forth a parable: A good word is like a good tree, firmly rooted, with branches reaching the sky, yielding fruit in every season by God's permission. This parable is meant for people to reflect.

Conversely, an evil word is like a bad tree, uprooted from the earth, with no stability. God will strengthen those who believe with a firm word in this world and the Hereafter, but He will lead wrongdoers astray. God does what He wills.

Have you seen those who exchanged God's favor for ingratitude and led their people to ruin? They will end up in Hell, a terrible place to stay. They set up idols as equals to God to mislead people. Say, "Enjoy your brief power, for your journey's end will be the Fire."

Tell my servants who believe to establish regular prayers and spend in charity, secretly and openly, before a Day comes when there will be no bargaining or friendship.

God created the heavens and the earth, sends down rain to produce fruits for you, and made ships and rivers subject to you. He made the sun and the moon, night and day, to serve you. He gives you everything you ask for. If you tried to count God's favors, you could not. Yet, humans are often unjust and ungrateful.

Remember when Abraham said, "O my Lord, make this city safe and keep me and my sons from worshipping idols. They have led many people astray. Whoever follows me is of me, and whoever disobeys me, You are Forgiving and Merciful. O our Lord, I have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley near Your Sacred House so they may establish prayer. Fill the hearts of people with love for them and provide them with fruits so they may be grateful.""O our Lord! I have settled some of my descendants in a barren valley near Your Sacred House so they may establish prayer. Make some people's hearts inclined towards them and provide them with fruits so they may be grateful. 

O our Lord! You know what we conceal and what we reveal; nothing is hidden from You, whether on earth or in heaven. Praise be to God, Who has granted me Ishmael and Isaac in my old age. Truly, my Lord is the Hearer of Prayer.

O my Lord! Make me and my descendants regular in prayer, and accept my prayer. O our Lord! Forgive me, my parents, and all believers on the Day of Judgment.

Do not think that God is unaware of what the wrongdoers do. He only gives them respite until a day when eyes will stare in horror, as they rush forward with their heads raised, their gaze not returning to them, and their hearts empty.

Warn people of the Day when the punishment will come upon them, and the wrongdoers will say, 'Our Lord! Give us a little more time; we will answer Your call and follow the messengers.' But it will be said to them, 'Did you not swear before that you would not face any decline?'

You lived in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves, and it was clear how We dealt with them, making them examples for you. They plotted their schemes, but their plots are known to God, even if they could move mountains.

Do not think that God will fail to keep His promise to His messengers. God is Mighty and capable of retribution. On the Day when the earth and heavens will be changed, everyone will be brought before God, the One, the Irresistible.

You will see the sinners bound together in chains, their garments made of liquid pitch, and their faces covered with fire. This is so God may repay each soul according to its deeds. God is swift in reckoning.

This is a clear message for mankind so they may be warned and know that He is the One God, and people of understanding may take heed.

Chapter 15: AL-HIJR (The Rocky Tract)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

A.L.R. These are the verses of the Qur'an, a clear Book. The disbelievers will wish they had submitted to God. Let them enjoy and be deceived by false hope; they will soon know.

We never destroyed a population without a set term. No nation can advance or delay its term. They say, 'O you to whom the Reminder is revealed, you are surely insane. Why don't you bring angels to us if you are truthful?'

We do not send angels except with the truth, and then the disbelievers would not be given respite. We have sent down the Reminder, and We will surely guard it from corruption.

We sent messengers before you among the previous communities, but no messenger came to them without being mocked. Thus, We let disbelief enter the hearts of the sinners."They wouldn't believe in the message, even though the examples of past people have already passed. Even if We opened a gate to heaven for them and they kept ascending through it, they would say, "Our eyes are deceived; we are bewitched."

We have set the zodiac signs in the heavens and made them beautiful for all to see. We have also guarded them from every cursed devil. If any devil tries to listen stealthily, a bright flaming fire pursues them.

We spread out the earth, set firm mountains on it, and produced everything in balanced measure. We provided means of sustenance for you and for those you do not support. Everything has its treasures with Us, and We send it down in measured amounts.

We send the fertilizing winds and cause rain to descend, providing you with water, though you do not store it. It is We who give life and death, and We are the inheritors. We know those who hasten forward and those who lag behind. Your Lord will gather them together; He is Wise and Knowing.

We created man from sounding clay, from mud molded into shape. Before that, We created the jinn from scorching fire. When your Lord said to the angels, "I am about to create a human from clay," and when I have fashioned him and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down in prostration to him. The angels prostrated, all except Iblis, who refused.

God said, "O Iblis, what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated?" Iblis replied, "I am not one to prostrate to a human You created from clay." God said, "Then get out from here, for you are rejected and accursed until the Day of Judgment." Iblis asked for respite until the Day of Resurrection, and God granted it.

Iblis said, "Because You have put me in the wrong, I will make wrong seem fair to them on earth and mislead them all, except Your sincere servants." God said, "This is a straight path to Me. You have no authority over My servants except those who follow you."

Hell is the promised place for them all, with seven gates, each assigned to a class of sinners. The righteous will be in gardens and fountains, greeted with peace and security. We will remove any sense of injury from their hearts, and they will be like brothers, joyfully facing each other on thrones. They will not feel fatigue nor be asked to leave.

Tell My servants that I am indeed the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."Tell My servants that I am indeed the Forgiving, the Merciful. But also let them know that My punishment is severe. 

Share with them the story of Abraham's guests. When they entered his presence and greeted him with 'Peace,' he felt uneasy. They reassured him, saying, 'Don't be afraid! We bring you good news of a wise son.' Abraham questioned how this could be, given his old age. They confirmed the news, urging him not to despair. Abraham responded, 'Who despairs of their Lord's mercy except those who are lost?'

Abraham then asked the messengers about their mission. They replied, 'We are sent to a sinful people, except for Lot's followers, whom we will save, except his wife, who will remain behind.' When the messengers arrived at Lot's place, he recognized them as strangers. They informed him of their mission and instructed him to leave with his family during the night, without looking back. They revealed that the sinners would be destroyed by morning.

The people of the city, excited by the arrival of the guests, approached Lot. He pleaded with them not to disgrace him and to fear God. They reminded him of their previous warnings. Lot offered his daughters to them instead, but they were blinded by their desires. By morning, a mighty blast overtook them, and their cities were turned upside down, raining down stones of baked clay.

These events serve as signs for those who understand and believe. The cities were on a well-known route, and the people of the wood and the rocky tract also faced retribution for their wrongdoings. Despite receiving Our signs, they turned away, feeling secure in their mountain homes. But a mighty blast seized them in the morning, and their efforts were in vain.

We created the heavens and the earth with purpose, and the Hour is coming. So, forgive with graciousness. Your Lord is the All-Wise Creator, and We have given you the Seven Oft-Repeated Verses and the Grand Qur'an. Do not envy what We have given others, and be kind to the believers. Declare that you are a clear warner, just as We sent down warnings to those who divided the Scripture."Tell My servants that I am indeed the Forgiving, the Merciful. But also let them know that My punishment is severe.

Share with them the story of Abraham's guests. When they entered his presence and greeted him with 'Peace,' he felt uneasy. They reassured him, saying, 'Don't be afraid! We bring you good news of a wise son.' Abraham questioned how this could be, given his old age. They confirmed the news, urging him not to despair. Abraham responded, 'Who despairs of their Lord's mercy except those who are lost?'

Abraham then asked the messengers about their mission. They replied, 'We are sent to a sinful people, except for Lot's followers, whom we will save, except his wife, who will remain behind.' When the messengers arrived at Lot's place, he recognized them as strangers. They informed him of their mission and instructed him to leave with his family during the night, without looking back. They revealed that the sinners would be destroyed by morning.

The people of the city, excited by the arrival of the guests, approached Lot. He pleaded with them not to disgrace him and to fear God. They reminded him of their previous warnings. Lot offered his daughters to them instead, but they were blinded by their desires. By morning, a mighty blast overtook them, and their cities were turned upside down, raining down stones of baked clay.

These events serve as signs for those who understand and believe. The cities were on a well-known route, and the people of the wood and the rocky tract also faced retribution for their wrongdoings. Despite receiving Our signs, they turned away, feeling secure in their mountain homes. But a mighty blast seized them in the morning, and their efforts were in vain.

We created the heavens and the earth with purpose, and the Hour is coming. So, forgive with graciousness. Your Lord is the All-Wise Creator, and We have given you the Seven Oft-Repeated Verses and the Grand Qur'an. Do not envy what We have given others, and be kind to the believers. Declare that you are a clear warner, just as We sent down warnings to those who divided the Scripture.

Those who have made the Qur'an into shreds (as they please). By the Lord, We will surely call them to account for all their deeds. So, proclaim what you are commanded and turn away from those who join false gods with God. We will defend you against the scoffers who adopt another god besides God. They will soon come to know.

We know how distressed you are by what they say. But celebrate the praises of your Lord and be among those who prostrate themselves in adoration. Serve your Lord until the Hour that is certain comes to you.

Chapter 16: AN-NAHL (THE BEE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

The command of God is coming, so do not seek to hasten it. Glory to Him, and He is far above having the partners they ascribe to Him! He sends down His angels with inspiration to His servants, saying, "Warn mankind that there is no god but Me, so fulfill your duty to Me."

He created the heavens and the earth with truth. He is exalted above all that they associate with Him. He created man from a drop of fluid, yet man becomes an open opponent. He created cattle for you, providing warmth, benefits, and food. You find beauty in them when you bring them home and when you take them out to pasture. They carry your heavy loads to lands you could not reach without great trouble. Your Lord is Kind and Merciful.

He created horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride and use for show, and He creates things you do not know. God guides the way, but some paths are not straight. If He willed, He could have guided all of you. He sends down rain from the sky, providing drink and vegetation for your cattle. With it, He produces crops, olives, date-palms, grapes, and every kind of fruit. These are signs for those who reflect.

He made the night and the day, the sun and the moon, and the stars subject to His command. These are signs for those who are wise. He created things on earth in varying colors and qualities. These are signs for those who celebrate His praises. He made the sea subject so you may eat fresh meat and extract ornaments to wear. You see ships plowing through it, seeking His bounty, so you may be grateful.

He set up mountains on the earth to prevent it from shaking with you, and rivers and roads for guidance. He created landmarks and stars for navigation. Is He who creates like one who does not create? Will you not receive admonition? If you count God's favors, you cannot number them. God is Forgiving and Merciful. He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. Those whom they invoke besides God create nothing and are themselves created.They are dead, not alive, and they do not know when they will be resurrected. Your God is one God. Those who do not believe in the afterlife are ignorant and arrogant. God knows what they hide and what they reveal, and He does not love the proud.

When asked, "What has your Lord revealed?" they dismiss it as "Tales of the ancients." On the Day of Judgment, they will bear their own burdens and also the burdens of those they misled. Those before them also plotted against God's way, but God destroyed their structures from the foundations, and His wrath came upon them unexpectedly.

On the Day of Judgment, He will disgrace them and ask, "Where are My partners for whose sake you opposed My guidance?" Those with knowledge will say, "Today, disgrace and evil are upon the unbelievers." The angels will take the lives of those who wronged themselves, and they will try to submit, saying, "We did no evil." But God knows what they did.

They will be told, "Enter the gates of Hell to dwell there forever. What an evil abode for the arrogant." To the righteous, it will be said, "What has your Lord revealed?" They will say, "All that is good." For those who do good, there is good in this world, and the home of the Hereafter is even better.

They will enter Gardens of Eternity, with rivers flowing beneath them, and they will have whatever they wish. This is how God rewards the righteous. The angels will greet them with peace and tell them to enter the Garden because of the good they did.

Do the ungodly wait until the angels come to them or the command of your Lord for their doom? Those before them did the same, and God did not wrong them; they wronged themselves. The evil results of their deeds overtook them, and the wrath they mocked surrounded them.

The worshippers of false gods say, "If God had willed, we would not have worshipped anything besides Him, nor would we have prohibited anything without His command." This is what those before them said. The mission of the messengers is only to preach the clear message.

We sent a messenger to every people, saying, "Serve God and avoid evil." Some were guided by God, and others were destined for error. Travel through the earth and see the end of those who denied the truth. If you are anxious for their guidance, know that God does not guide those He leaves to stray, and they have no helpers.

They swear by God that He will not raise up those who die, but it is a promise binding on Him in truth, though most people do not realize it. They will be raised up so that He may show them the truth of their differences and that the rejecters of truth may realize they were wrong.When they differ, those who disbelieve will realize they were liars. When We will something, We simply say, "Be," and it is.

For those who leave their homes for God after being oppressed, We will provide a good home in this world, and the reward in the Hereafter will be even greater if they only knew. These are the ones who are patient and trust in their Lord.

Before you, We sent messengers who were also men, inspired by Us. If you don't know this, ask those who have the knowledge. We sent them with clear signs and scriptures, and We have revealed the message to you so you can explain it to people and make them reflect.

Do those who plot evil feel safe that God won't cause the earth to swallow them or that His punishment won't come upon them unexpectedly? Or that He won't seize them while they are moving about, leaving them no escape? Or that He won't gradually waste them away? Your Lord is indeed full of kindness and mercy.

Have they not observed everything God has created, how their shadows move to the right and left, prostrating to God in humility? Everything in the heavens and on earth, including living creatures and angels, prostrates to God and is not arrogant. They all revere their Lord and do what they are commanded.

God has said, "Do not take two gods; there is only One God. So fear Me alone." Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him, and religion is His forever. Will you then fear anyone other than God?

Whatever good you have is from God, and when you are in distress, you cry out to Him. Yet, when He removes the distress, some of you turn to other gods. This is to show their ingratitude for the favors We have bestowed on them. Enjoy your brief time, but soon you will know your folly.

They assign a portion of what We have given them to things they do not know. By God, you will be called to account for your false inventions. They assign daughters to God—glory be to Him!—and for themselves, they desire sons. When one of them is informed of the birth of a daughter, his face darkens, and he is filled with inward grief. He hides himself from his people because of the bad news. Should he keep her in contempt or bury her in the dust? What an evil choice they make!

For those who do not believe in the Hereafter, there is an evil attribute, but God's is the highest attribute. He is the Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom. If God were to punish people for their wrongdoing, He would not leave a single living creature on earth. But He gives them respite until an appointed time. When their time comes, they cannot delay it for a single hour, nor can they advance it.

They attribute to God what they hate for themselves, and their tongues assert the falsehood that all good things are for themselves. Without a doubt, for them is the Fire, and they will be the first to be hastened into it.They will surely face the Fire and be abandoned. They attribute to God what they themselves hate and falsely claim that they will receive good. Without a doubt, they will face the Fire and be the first to be thrown into it.

By God, We sent messengers to previous nations, but Satan made their evil deeds seem attractive to them. He is their ally today, and they will face a severe punishment.

We revealed the Book to you so you could clarify their differences and guide and show mercy to those who believe.

God sends down rain from the sky, reviving the earth after its death. This is a sign for those who listen.

In cattle, there is a lesson for you. We give you pure milk to drink, produced from what is inside their bodies, between excretions and blood.

From the fruits of date palms and vines, you get wholesome drink and food. This is a sign for those who are wise.

Your Lord inspired the bee to build its hives in hills, trees, and human structures. It eats from all the fruits and follows the paths made smooth by its Lord. From within their bodies comes a drink of various colors, which has healing properties for people. This is a sign for those who reflect.

God creates you and takes your souls at death. Some of you are sent back to a feeble age, knowing nothing after having known much. God is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.

God has given some of you more sustenance than others. Those who are more favored do not share their provision with their slaves to make them equal. Will they then deny the favors of God?

God has made for you mates of your own kind and given you children and grandchildren. He has provided you with good things. Will you then believe in falsehood and be ungrateful for God's favors?

They worship others besides God, who have no power to provide them with anything from the heavens or the earth.

Do not make comparisons for God. God knows, and you do not.

God sets forth a parable: a slave under the dominion of another, who has no power, and a man on whom We have bestowed goodly favors, who spends freely. Are the two equal? Praise be to God! But most of them do not understand.

God sets forth another parable: two men, one of them dumb, with no power, a burden to his master, bringing no good. Is he equal to one who commands justice and follows a straight path?

To God belongs the mystery of the heavens and the earth. The decision of the Hour (of Judgment) is as quick as the twinkling of an eye or even quicker. God has power over all things.

God brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when you knew nothing. He gave you hearing, sight, and intelligence so that you may give thanks.

Do they not look at the birds, held poised in the midst of the air and sky? Nothing holds them up but God.God has provided you with homes for rest and comfort, and made tents from animal skins that are easy to carry when you travel. He has also given you wool, fur, and hair from animals to make useful items. 

God created shelters for you from the sun, places of refuge in the mountains, and garments to protect you from heat and harm. He completes His favors upon you so that you may submit to His will.

If people turn away, your duty is only to deliver the clear message. They recognize God's favors but deny them, and most of them are ungrateful.

On the Day of Judgment, a witness will be raised from every nation, and no excuses will be accepted from disbelievers. When wrongdoers see the penalty, it will not be lightened, nor will they be given respite.

Those who associated partners with God will see their false gods and realize they were liars. On that day, they will submit to God, and all their inventions will fail them.

For those who reject God and hinder others from His path, the penalty will be increased because they spread corruption. On that day, a witness will be raised from every nation, and you (Muhammad) will be a witness against your people. The Book has been revealed to you as a guide, mercy, and good news for those who submit.

God commands justice, doing good, and giving to relatives. He forbids shameful deeds, injustice, and rebellion. He instructs you so that you may take heed.

Fulfill the covenant of God and do not break your oaths after confirming them. Do not be like a woman who unravels her yarn after it has become strong. Do not use your oaths to deceive each other, as God will test you by this and make clear to you on the Day of Judgment what you disagreed about.

If God willed, He could make you all one people, but He guides whom He pleases and leaves astray whom He pleases. You will be called to account for all your actions.

Do not use your oaths to deceive each other, causing someone's foot to slip after it was firmly planted, and tasting the evil consequences of hindering others from God's path. Do not sell God's covenant for a small price, as what is with God is far better for you if you only knew.What you have will fade away, but what God has will last forever. We will reward those who are patient with the best of their deeds. 

Whoever does good, whether man or woman, and believes, will be given a good life and rewarded according to their best actions.

When you read the Qur'an, seek protection from Satan. He has no power over those who believe and trust in their Lord. His influence is only over those who follow him and associate others with God.

When we replace one revelation with another, people say you are making it up, but most of them do not understand. Say, the Holy Spirit has brought the revelation from your Lord to strengthen the believers and as guidance and good news for those who submit.

They say a man teaches him, but the language of the one they refer to is foreign, while this is clear Arabic. Those who do not believe in God's signs will not be guided and will face a severe penalty. Only those who do not believe in God's revelations invent lies.

Anyone who disbelieves after believing, except under compulsion while their heart remains firm in faith, will face God's wrath and a dreadful penalty. This is because they prefer the life of this world over the Hereafter, and God does not guide those who reject faith.

God has sealed their hearts, ears, and eyes, and they are heedless. In the Hereafter, they will be the losers. But for those who leave their homes after trials and persecutions, and strive and fight for their faith with patience, God is Forgiving and Merciful.

On the Day of Judgment, every soul will plead for itself and be fully recompensed for its actions without injustice. God gives the example of a city that was secure and well-provided but became ungrateful, so it faced hunger and fear because of its actions.

A messenger came to them, but they rejected him, so they were punished for their wrongdoing. Eat of the lawful and good sustenance God has provided and be grateful if you truly serve Him.

God has only forbidden dead meat, blood, swine flesh, and anything over which other names than God's have been invoked. But if one is forced by necessity without willful disobedience, God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Do not falsely declare things as lawful or forbidden to invent lies against God. Those who do so will never prosper.Those who lie against God will not succeed. They may enjoy a brief benefit, but they will face severe punishment.

We prohibited certain things for the Jews, as previously mentioned. We did not wrong them; they wronged themselves.

However, your Lord is forgiving and merciful to those who do wrong out of ignorance and then repent and make amends.

Abraham was a model of obedience to God, true in faith, and did not associate others with God. He was grateful for God's favors, and God chose and guided him on the right path. We gave him good in this world, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.

We have inspired you, Muhammad, to follow the faith of Abraham, who was upright and not an idolater. The Sabbath was made strict for those who disagreed about its observance, and God will judge their differences on the Day of Judgment.

Invite people to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good preaching, and argue with them in the best manner. Your Lord knows best who has strayed and who is guided.

If you retaliate, do so in proportion to the wrong done to you. But if you are patient, it is better for those who are patient. Be patient, for your patience is from God. Do not grieve over them or be distressed by their plots. God is with those who restrain themselves and do good.

Glory to God, who took His servant on a night journey from the Sacred Mosque to the farthest Mosque, whose surroundings We have blessed, to show him some of Our signs. He is the Hearer and Seer.

We gave Moses the Book and made it a guide for the Children of Israel, commanding them not to take any protector besides God. They are the descendants of those We carried with Noah, who was a grateful servant.

We warned the Children of Israel in the Book that they would cause mischief on earth twice and be arrogant. When the first warning came to pass, We sent against them servants of Ours with great might, who ravaged their land. When the second warning came, We allowed their enemies to disfigure their faces and enter their Temple, destroying everything they conquered.

If you do good, it is for your own benefit; if you do evil, it is against yourselves. If you return to disobedience, We will return to punishment, and We have made Hell a prison for the disbelievers.

This Qur'an guides to what is most right and gives glad tidings to the believers who do righteous deeds, promising them a magnificent reward.This guidance leads to what is most upright and brings good news to believers who do good deeds, promising them a great reward. For those who do not believe in the Hereafter, we have prepared a severe punishment.

People often pray for things that are harmful as they pray for good, because humans are hasty by nature. We have made the night and the day as two signs: the night is dark, and the day is bright, so you can seek bounty from your Lord and know the count of years and the reckoning. We have explained everything in detail.

Every person's fate is tied to their own actions. On the Day of Judgment, we will present a scroll that they will see spread open. It will be said, "Read your record; today, your own soul is enough to account against you." Whoever receives guidance does so for their own benefit, and whoever goes astray does so to their own loss. No one can bear another's burden, and we do not punish until we have sent a messenger to give warning.

When we decide to destroy a population, we first send a clear command to those who live comfortably but transgress, proving the word true against them, and then we destroy them completely. We have destroyed many generations after Noah, and your Lord is fully aware of the sins of His servants.

If anyone desires the fleeting things of this life, we readily grant them as we will, but in the end, we have prepared Hell for them, where they will burn, disgraced and rejected. Those who desire the Hereafter and strive for it with true effort, while having faith, will have their striving accepted.

We bestow the bounties of your Lord freely on all, both those who seek this world and those who seek the Hereafter. The bounties of your Lord are not limited. See how we have favored some over others, but the Hereafter is greater in rank and excellence.

Do not set up any other god besides God, or you will sit in disgrace and destitution. Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him and be kind to your parents. If one or both of them reach old age with you, do not say a word of contempt to them or repel them, but speak to them with honor. Lower to them the wing of humility out of kindness and say, "My Lord, have mercy on them as they cherished me in childhood."

Your Lord knows best what is in your hearts. If you do righteous deeds, He is most forgiving to those who turn to Him in repentance. Give your relatives their due rights, as well as to those in need and the wayfarer, but do not squander your wealth wastefully. Spendthrifts are brothers of the devils, and the devil is ever ungrateful to his Lord.

If you must turn away from them in pursuit of mercy from your Lord, which you expect, still speak to them with gentle words. Do not be miserly, nor be overly generous, lest you become blameworthy and destitute. Your Lord provides sustenance in abundance for whom He pleases and in just measure. He knows and regards all His servants."God is always aware and watching over His servants. Do not kill your children out of fear of poverty; We will provide for them and for you. Killing them is a grave sin. Avoid adultery; it is a shameful act that leads to other evils. Do not take a life that God has made sacred, except for a just cause. If someone is wrongfully killed, their heir has the right to seek justice, but should not exceed the limits in taking a life, as they will be supported by the law.

Do not misuse the property of orphans, except to improve it, until they reach maturity. Fulfill every promise, as you will be questioned about it on the Day of Judgment. Give full measure and weigh with a true balance; this is fair and better in the end. Do not pursue things you have no knowledge of, as you will be questioned about your hearing, sight, and heart. Do not walk arrogantly on the earth; you cannot break the earth or reach the mountains in height. All such behavior is hateful in the sight of your Lord.

These are wise teachings revealed by your Lord. Do not associate any other god with God, or you will be thrown into Hell, disgraced and abandoned. Has your Lord chosen sons for you and daughters for Himself from among the angels? This is a grievous statement. We have explained things in various ways in this Qur'an so that people may take heed, but it only increases their aversion.

Say: If there were other gods besides Him, they would have sought a way to the Lord of the Throne. Glory to Him! He is exalted above what they say. The seven heavens and the earth and all beings therein declare His glory, but you do not understand their praise. He is ever Forbearing, Most Forgiving.

When you recite the Qur'an, We place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter. We cover their hearts and ears so they do not understand it. When you mention your Lord alone in the Qur'an, they turn their backs in aversion. We know best why they listen to you and what they say in private. The wicked say, 'You follow only a man bewitched.' See what comparisons they make for you, but they are astray and cannot find the way.

They say, 'When we are reduced to bones and dust, will we really be raised up as a new creation?' Say: 'Be stones or iron, or any other created matter that you think is harder to be raised up.' They will ask, 'Who will bring us back?' Say: 'He who created you first.' They will shake their heads and ask, 'When will that be?' Say: 'It may be soon.'

On the Day when He calls you, you will respond with His praise, and you will think you only stayed a little while. Tell My servants to speak kindly to each other, as Satan sows discord among them. Satan is a clear enemy to man."Tell My servants to speak kindly to one another, as Satan sows discord among them. Satan is a clear enemy to humanity. Your Lord knows you best: if He wills, He grants mercy; if He wills, He punishes. You are not sent to control their affairs. Your Lord knows best all beings in the heavens and on earth. We have given some prophets more gifts than others, and to David, We gave the Psalms.

Say: "Call on those you think can help besides Him; they have no power to remove your troubles or change them." Those whom they call upon seek ways to get closer to their Lord, hoping for His mercy and fearing His wrath. The wrath of your Lord is something to be cautious of. There is no population that We will not destroy or punish before the Day of Judgment; this is written in the eternal record.

We refrain from sending signs because previous generations treated them as false. We sent the she-camel to the Thamud as a clear sign, but they wronged her. We only send signs to instill fear. Your Lord encompasses mankind. The vision We showed you is a trial for people, as is the cursed tree mentioned in the Qur'an. We warn them, but it only increases their transgression.

When We told the angels to bow down to Adam, they all did except Iblis. He said, "Shall I bow to one created from clay?" Iblis said, "If you give me respite until the Day of Judgment, I will mislead his descendants, except a few." God said, "Go, and whoever follows you, Hell will be their recompense." Lead astray those you can with your voice, assault them with your forces, share in their wealth and children, and make promises to them. But Satan's promises are only deceit. As for My servants, you have no authority over them. Your Lord is sufficient as a protector.

Your Lord makes the ship go smoothly for you on the sea so you may seek His bounty. He is most merciful. When distress seizes you at sea, those you call upon besides Him leave you, but when He brings you back to land safely, you turn away. Man is ever ungrateful. Do you feel secure that He will not cause the land to swallow you or send a violent tornado against you? Or that He will not send you back to sea and drown you because of your ingratitude?

We have honored the children of Adam, provided them with transport on land and sea, given them good and pure sustenance, and conferred on them special favors above many of Our creations. One day, We will call all human beings with their records. Those given their record in their right hand will read it with pleasure and will not be wronged in the least."On that day, everyone will be called with their leader. Those who receive their record in their right hand will read it with joy and will not be wronged at all. But those who were blind in this world will be blind in the hereafter and even more astray from the path.

They tried to tempt you away from what We revealed to you, to make you invent something else in Our name. If We had not given you strength, you might have inclined towards them a little. In that case, We would have made you taste double punishment in this life and after death, and you would have found no helper against Us.

They wanted to scare you off the land to expel you, but they would not have stayed there long after you. This has been Our way with the messengers We sent before you, and you will find no change in Our ways.

Establish regular prayers from the decline of the sun until the darkness of the night, and the morning prayer and reading, for the morning prayer and reading are witnessed. Pray during the night as an additional prayer for you; perhaps your Lord will raise you to a station of praise and glory.

Say, 'O my Lord! Let my entry be by the gate of truth and honor, and likewise my exit by the gate of truth and honor; and grant me from Your presence an authority to aid me.' And say, 'Truth has arrived, and falsehood has perished, for falsehood is bound to perish.'

We send down in the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe, but it causes nothing but loss to the unjust. When We bestow Our favors on man, he turns away and becomes remote, but when evil seizes him, he gives himself up to despair. Say, 'Everyone acts according to their own disposition, but your Lord knows best who is best guided on the way.'

They ask you about the Spirit. Say, 'The Spirit comes by the command of my Lord, and of knowledge, you have been given only a little.' If We willed, We could take away what We have revealed to you, and you would find no guardian against Us in that matter, except for mercy from your Lord. His bounty to you is indeed great.

Say, 'If all of mankind and jinns were to gather together to produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof, even if they helped each other.' We have explained to man in this Qur'an every kind of similitude, yet most men refuse to believe except with ingratitude.

They say, 'We will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us, or until you have a garden of date trees and vines and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst, carrying abundant water, or until you cause the sky to fall in pieces as you say will happen, or bring God and the angels before us face to face, or you have a house adorned with gold, or you mount a ladder right into the skies. No, we shall not even believe in your mounting until you send down to us a book that we can read.' Say, 'Glory to my Lord! Am I anything but a man, a messenger?'

What kept men back from belief when guidance came to them?"People questioned, "Has God sent a human like us as His messenger?" Say, "If there were angels living on earth, We would have sent an angel as a messenger." God is enough as a witness between me and you. He knows and sees everything about His servants.

Those whom God guides are truly guided, but those He leaves astray will have no protector. On Judgment Day, they will be gathered blind, mute, and deaf, and their home will be Hell. Whenever the fire lessens, We will increase its intensity.

This is their punishment for rejecting Our signs and doubting resurrection after becoming bones and dust. Don't they see that the One who created the heavens and the earth can recreate them? Yet, the unjust refuse to believe.

Say, "If you controlled the treasures of God's mercy, you would withhold them out of fear of spending, for humans are always stingy."

We gave Moses nine clear signs. Ask the Children of Israel about them. When Moses came to Pharaoh, he said, "Moses, I think you are bewitched." Moses replied, "You know these signs are from the Lord of the heavens and the earth. I think you are doomed, Pharaoh."

Pharaoh wanted to expel them from the land, but We drowned him and his followers. After him, We told the Children of Israel to live in the land, but when the final promise comes, We will gather you all together.

We sent down the Qur'an in truth, and it has descended in truth. We sent you only to give good news and to warn. We revealed the Qur'an in parts so you could recite it to people gradually.

Say, "Believe in it or not, those who were given knowledge before it fall on their faces in prostration when it is recited." They say, "Glory to our Lord! The promise of our Lord has been fulfilled." They fall down in tears, and it increases their humility.

Say, "Call upon God or the Most Merciful; whichever name you use, all the best names belong to Him. Do not be too loud or too quiet in your prayer, but seek a middle course."

Say, "Praise be to God, who has no son, no partner in His dominion, and no need for a protector from humiliation. Magnify Him for His greatness and glory."

Chapter 18: The Cave

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Praise be to God, who sent the Book to His servant and made it free of any crookedness. It is straight and clear to warn of severe punishment from Him and to give good news to the believers who do righteous deeds that they will have a good reward.Chapter 18: The Cave

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Praise be to God, who sent the Book to His servant and made it free of any crookedness. It is straight and clear to warn of severe punishment from Him and to give good news to the believers who do righteous deeds that they will have a good reward, where they will remain forever.

It also warns those who say, "God has taken a son." They have no knowledge of this, nor did their ancestors. What they say is a grievous falsehood. You might torment yourself with grief over their disbelief in this message. 

Everything on earth is a glittering show to test who is best in conduct. Eventually, all will become dust and dry soil. Do you think the story of the Companions of the Cave and the Inscription is a wonder among Our signs?

When the youths sought refuge in the cave, they prayed, "Our Lord, grant us mercy from You and guide us in our affair." We sealed their hearing in the cave for many years. Then We awakened them to see which of the two groups could best calculate the time they had stayed.

We narrate their story in truth: they were young men who believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance. We strengthened their hearts when they stood up and declared, "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We will never call upon any god other than Him; if we did, we would be uttering an enormity."

Their people had taken other gods without any clear authority. Who does more wrong than one who invents a lie against God? When you turn away from them and what they worship besides God, seek refuge in the cave. Your Lord will shower His mercy on you and make your affair easy.

You would have seen the sun, when it rose, decline to the right of their cave, and when it set, turn away to the left, while they lay in the open space in the midst of the cave. This is one of the signs of God. Whom God guides is rightly guided, but whom He leaves to stray, you will find no protector to lead him to the right way.

You would have thought them awake while they were asleep. We turned them to the right and left, and their dog stretched its paws at the entrance. If you had seen them, you would have turned back in flight, filled with terror.

We awakened them so they could question each other. One of them asked, "How long have we stayed here?" They said, "A day or part of a day." Others said, "Your Lord knows best how long we have stayed. Now send one of you with this silver coin to the city to find the purest food and bring some back. Let him be courteous and not inform anyone about you."

If they discover you, they will stone you or force you back to their religion, and you will never succeed. Thus, We made their case known to the people so they might know that God's promise is true and that there is no doubt about the Hour of Judgment. They disputed among themselves about their affair. Some said, "Construct a building over them." Their Lord knows best about them."Those who prevailed in their affair said, 'Let us build a place of worship over them.' This was to show that God's promise is true and that there is no doubt about the Hour of Judgment. When the people of the city argued about their case, they decided to construct a building over them. Some said, 'They were three, and their dog was the fourth.' Others guessed, 'They were five, and their dog was the sixth.' Yet others said, 'They were seven, and their dog was the eighth.' Say, 'My Lord knows best their number; only a few know the truth.' So don't argue about them except with clear evidence, and don't consult anyone about the Sleepers.

Don't say, 'I will do this tomorrow,' without adding, 'If God wills.' Remember your Lord when you forget and say, 'I hope my Lord will guide me closer to the right path.' They stayed in their cave for 300 years, adding nine more. Say, 'God knows best how long they stayed. He knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. How clearly He sees and hears everything! They have no protector other than Him, and He shares His command with no one.'

Recite what has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord. No one can change His words, and you will find no refuge other than Him. Stay patient with those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His face. Don't let your eyes overlook them, desiring the glitter of this life. Don't obey those whose hearts We have made heedless of Our remembrance, who follow their own desires and have gone beyond all bounds.

Say, 'The truth is from your Lord.' Let those who will, believe, and let those who will, disbelieve. We have prepared a Fire for the wrongdoers, whose walls will enclose them. If they ask for relief, they will be given water like molten brass, which will scald their faces. How dreadful the drink and how uncomfortable the resting place!

As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will not let the reward of anyone who does a good deed be lost. They will have Gardens of Eternity, with rivers flowing beneath them. They will be adorned with bracelets of gold and wear green garments of fine silk and brocade, reclining on raised thrones. How good the reward and how beautiful the resting place!

Tell them the parable of two men: We provided one of them with two gardens of grapevines, surrounded by date palms, with cornfields in between. Both gardens produced their fruit without fail, and We caused a river to flow through them. The man had abundant produce and said to his companion during a conversation, 'I have more wealth and a larger following than you.' He entered his garden, wronging himself, and said, 'I don't think this will ever perish, nor do I think the Hour of Judgment will come. Even if I am brought back to my Lord, I will surely find something better in exchange.'"His companion, during their argument, said, "Do you deny the One who created you from dust, then from a drop of seed, and then shaped you into a man?" He continued, "But as for me, God is my Lord, and I do not associate anyone with Him."

"Why didn't you say, when you entered your garden, 'This is what God wills; there is no power except with God'? Even if you see me as less wealthy and with fewer children than you, it may be that my Lord will give me something better than your garden and send a calamity from the sky upon your garden, turning it into barren ground. Or its water might sink deep into the earth, making it impossible for you to retrieve it."

And so, his fruits were destroyed, and he began wringing his hands over what he had spent on it, as it lay in ruins. He said, "Woe is me! I wish I had not associated anyone with my Lord." He had no group to help him against God, nor could he defend himself. In this situation, the only protection comes from God, the True One. He is the best to reward and the best to give success.

Give them the example of the life of this world: it is like the rain We send down from the sky, which the earth's vegetation absorbs, but soon it becomes dry stubble scattered by the winds. God prevails over all things. Wealth and children are the adornments of this worldly life, but the enduring good deeds are better in the sight of your Lord for reward and hope.

One day, We will remove the mountains, and you will see the earth as a level plain. We will gather them all together, leaving no one behind. They will be presented before your Lord in rows, and it will be said, "Now you have come to Us as We created you the first time, but you thought We had set no appointment for you."

The Book of Deeds will be placed before them, and you will see the sinners in great fear because of what is recorded in it. They will say, "Woe to us! What kind of book is this that leaves out nothing, small or great, but takes account of everything?" They will find all that they did present before them, and your Lord will not wrong anyone.

Remember when We said to the angels, "Bow down to Adam," and they all bowed except Iblis. He was one of the jinn and disobeyed his Lord's command. Will you then take him and his descendants as protectors instead of Me, even though they are your enemies? What a terrible exchange for the wrongdoers!

I did not make them witnesses to the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor to their own creation, nor do I take misleaders as helpers. On the Day when He will say, "Call on those whom you thought to be My partners," they will call on them, but they will not respond, and We will place a barrier between them.

The sinners will see the Fire and realize that they are about to fall into it, and they will find no way to escape. We have explained in detail in this Qur'an, for the benefit of mankind, every kind of example, but man is, in most things, contentious. What is there to keep people from believing now that guidance has come to them, or from seeking forgiveness from their Lord, except that they wish for the same fate as the ancients?"Or the punishment comes to them directly? What stops people from believing when guidance comes to them and from asking for forgiveness from their Lord, except that they wish for the same fate as those before them or to face the punishment directly?

We only send messengers to give good news and warnings. But the disbelievers argue with falsehood to weaken the truth, treating My signs and warnings as a joke. Who does more wrong than someone who is reminded of their Lord's signs but turns away, forgetting their own deeds? We have placed veils over their hearts and deafness in their ears, so they cannot understand. Even if you call them to guidance, they will never follow the right path.

Your Lord is Most Forgiving and Full of Mercy. If He were to call them to account for their deeds immediately, He would hasten their punishment. But they have an appointed time from which they cannot escape. We destroyed the populations that committed injustices, but we fixed a time for their destruction.

Remember when Moses said to his attendant, 'I will not give up until I reach the junction of the two seas, even if it takes years.' When they reached the junction, they forgot about their fish, which took its course through the sea. After they had passed on, Moses said to his attendant, 'Bring us our meal; we are tired from our journey.' The attendant replied, 'Do you remember when we rested by the rock? I forgot the fish, and only Satan made me forget to mention it. It took its course into the sea in a marvelous way.' Moses said, 'That is what we were seeking.' So they retraced their steps.

They found one of Our servants, whom We had given mercy and taught knowledge. Moses said to him, 'May I follow you so that you can teach me some of the knowledge you have been taught?' The servant replied, 'You will not be able to have patience with me. How can you be patient about things you do not understand?' Moses said, 'If God wills, you will find me patient, and I will not disobey you in anything.' The servant said, 'If you follow me, do not ask me about anything until I mention it to you.'

So they proceeded until they were in a boat, and the servant made a hole in it. Moses said, 'Have you made a hole to drown the people in it? You have done a strange thing!' The servant replied, 'Did I not tell you that you would not be able to have patience with me?' Moses said, 'Do not be angry with me for forgetting, and do not make my journey difficult.'

They continued until they met a young man, and the servant killed him. Moses said, 'Have you killed an innocent person who has killed no one? You have done a terrible thing!' The servant replied, 'Did I not tell you that you would not be able to have patience with me?' Moses said, 'If I ask you about anything after this, do not keep me in your company. You have received an excuse from me.'

They proceeded until they came to the inhabitants of a town, and they asked for food, but the people refused to host them."They asked the townspeople for food, but they refused to host them. They found a wall about to collapse, and the servant repaired it. Moses said, "If you wanted, you could have asked for payment for fixing it."

The servant replied, "This is where we part ways. I will explain the things you couldn't understand. The boat belonged to poor people working on the river. I damaged it because a king was seizing every boat by force. The young man had parents who were believers, and we feared he would cause them grief through rebellion and ingratitude. We hoped their Lord would give them a better, more compassionate child. The wall belonged to two orphan boys in the town. Beneath it was a treasure meant for them, as their father was a righteous man. Your Lord wanted them to grow up and retrieve their treasure as a mercy from Him. I did none of this on my own accord. This is the explanation of what you couldn't bear."

They asked you about Zul-Qarnain. Say, "I will tell you something about him." We established his power on earth and gave him the means to achieve everything. He followed a path until he reached the setting of the sun, where he found it setting in a muddy spring and encountered a people. We said, "O Zul-Qarnain! You can either punish them or treat them with kindness." He said, "Whoever does wrong, we will punish, and then he will be returned to his Lord, who will punish him severely. But whoever believes and does good will have a good reward, and we will speak to him kindly."

Then he followed another path until he reached the rising of the sun, where he found it rising on a people with no shelter from it. He left them as they were, and we fully understood his situation. He followed another path until he reached a place between two mountains, where he found a people who could barely understand a word. They said, "O Zul-Qarnain! Gog and Magog are causing trouble in the land. Can we pay you to build a barrier between us and them?" He replied, "What my Lord has given me is better, but help me with your strength, and I will build a strong barrier between you and them. Bring me blocks of iron." When he had filled the gap between the mountains, he said, "Blow with your bellows." When the iron was red hot, he said, "Bring me molten copper to pour over it." They were unable to scale or dig through it.

He said, "This is a mercy from my Lord. But when my Lord's promise comes to pass, He will make it into dust, for His promise is true." On that day, we will let them surge against each other like waves, and the trumpet will be blown, gathering them all together.On that day, we will present Hell to the disbelievers, fully exposed. These are the people whose eyes were covered from remembering Me and who couldn't even hear. Do the disbelievers think they can take My servants as protectors besides Me? We have prepared Hell as a welcome for the disbelievers.

Say, "Shall we tell you who will lose the most in their deeds? Those whose efforts were wasted in this life while they thought they were doing good." These are the ones who deny the signs of their Lord and the fact that they will meet Him. Their works are in vain, and on the Day of Judgment, we will give them no weight. Their reward is Hell because they rejected faith and mocked My signs and messengers.

But those who believe and do good deeds will have the Gardens of Paradise for their entertainment. They will live there forever, without any desire to leave. Say, "If the ocean were ink to write the words of my Lord, the ocean would be exhausted before the words of my Lord are finished, even if we added another ocean like it."

Say, "I am just a man like you, but it has been revealed to me that your God is one God. Whoever hopes to meet his Lord should do good deeds and not associate anyone in the worship of his Lord."

Chapter 19: Maryam (Mary)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Kaf. Ha. Ya. 'Ain. Sad. This is a recital of the mercy of your Lord to His servant Zakariya. When he cried to his Lord in secret, saying, "My Lord, my bones are weak, and my hair is gray, but I have never been unblessed in my prayer to You. I fear what my relatives will do after me, and my wife is barren. So give me an heir from Yourself, who will inherit from me and the family of Jacob, and make him, my Lord, one with whom You are well-pleased."

His prayer was answered: "O Zakariya, We give you good news of a son. His name will be Yahya (John). We have not given this name to anyone before." Zakariya said, "My Lord, how can I have a son when my wife is barren, and I have reached old age?" The answer came, "So it will be. Your Lord says, 'It is easy for Me. I created you before when you were nothing.'"

Zakariya asked for a sign. The answer was, "Your sign is that you will not speak to people for three nights, although you are not dumb." So Zakariya came out to his people from his chamber and signaled to them to celebrate God's praises in the morning and evening.

To his son came the command: "O Yahya, take hold of the Book with strength." And We gave him wisdom even as a youth, along with compassion and purity from Us. He was devout, kind to his parents, and not overbearing or rebellious. Peace be upon him the day he was born, the day he dies, and the day he will be raised to life again.

Relate in the Book the story of Mary, when she withdrew from her family to a place in the East. She placed a screen to screen herself from them, and We sent her Our angel, who appeared before her as a man in all respects.Mary said, "I seek refuge in the Most Merciful from you, if you fear God." The angel replied, "I am only a messenger from your Lord to announce the gift of a pure son to you." Mary questioned, "How can I have a son when no man has touched me, and I am not unchaste?" The angel responded, "Your Lord says, 'It is easy for Me. We will make him a sign for humanity and a mercy from Us. This is a matter already decreed.'"

So Mary conceived him and withdrew to a remote place. The pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm tree, and she cried out in anguish, "I wish I had died before this and was forgotten." But a voice called out from beneath her, "Do not grieve! Your Lord has provided a stream beneath you. Shake the trunk of the palm tree, and fresh, ripe dates will fall upon you. Eat, drink, and be comforted. If you see anyone, say, 'I have vowed a fast to the Most Merciful, so I will not speak to any human today.'"

Mary then brought the baby to her people, who were astonished and said, "O Mary, you have done something unprecedented! O sister of Aaron, your father was not a wicked man, nor was your mother unchaste." Mary pointed to the baby, and they asked, "How can we speak to a child in the cradle?" The baby spoke, "I am a servant of God. He has given me the Scripture and made me a prophet. He has blessed me wherever I am and enjoined upon me prayer and charity as long as I live. He made me dutiful to my mother and did not make me arrogant or unblessed. Peace is upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and the day I will be raised to life again."

This is Jesus, the son of Mary, a statement of truth about which they dispute. It is not befitting for God to take a son. Glory be to Him! When He decrees a matter, He only says to it, "Be," and it is. God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is the straight path. Yet, the sects differ among themselves, and woe to the disbelievers on the Day of Judgment. They will see and hear clearly on that Day, but today they are in manifest error. Warn them of the Day of Distress when the matter will be decided, for they are negligent and do not believe. We will inherit the earth and all beings on it, and to Us, they will all return.

Mention in the Book the story of Abraham. He was a man of truth and a prophet. He said to his father, "O my father, why do you worship what does not hear, see, or benefit you in any way? Knowledge has come to me that has not reached you, so follow me, and I will guide you to a straight path. Do not worship Satan, for he is a rebel against the Most Merciful. I fear that a punishment from the Most Merciful will afflict you, and you will become a friend of Satan." His father replied, "Do you reject my gods, O Abraham? If you do not stop, I will stone you. Leave me now."Abraham responded, "Peace be upon you. I will ask my Lord to forgive you. He has always been kind to me. I will distance myself from you and your idols and pray to my Lord. Perhaps my prayers will be answered."

When Abraham left them and their idols, We blessed him with Isaac and Jacob, and made each of them a prophet. We granted them Our mercy and gave them a high and honorable status.

Also, mention in the Book the story of Moses. He was chosen and was a messenger and a prophet. We called him from the right side of Mount Sinai and brought him close for a special conversation. Out of Our mercy, We also made his brother Aaron a prophet.

Mention in the Book the story of Ishmael. He was true to his promises and was a messenger and a prophet. He encouraged his people to pray and give charity, and he was pleasing to his Lord.

Mention in the Book the story of Idris. He was a man of truth and a prophet, and We raised him to a high position.

These were some of the prophets whom God blessed, from the descendants of Adam, those carried with Noah, the descendants of Abraham and Israel, and those We guided and chose. When the revelations of the Most Merciful were recited to them, they would fall down in prostration and weep.

But after them came generations who neglected prayers and followed their desires. They will face destruction, except those who repent, believe, and do good deeds. They will enter the Garden and will not be wronged in the least.

These are the Gardens of Eternity, promised by the Most Gracious to His servants. His promise will certainly come to pass. They will hear no idle talk there, only peace, and they will have their sustenance morning and evening.

This is the Garden which We give as an inheritance to those of Our servants who guard against evil. The angels say, "We descend only by the command of your Lord. To Him belongs what is before us, what is behind us, and what is between. Your Lord never forgets."

He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. So worship Him and be steadfast in His service. Do you know anyone equal to Him?

Man says, "What! When I am dead, shall I then be raised up alive?" Does man not remember that We created him before, when he was nothing?

By your Lord, We will gather them and the devils, and bring them, kneeling, around Hell. We will then pull out from every group those who were most stubborn in rebellion against the Most Gracious. We know best who deserves to be burned in Hell.

Every one of you will pass over it; this is a decree from your Lord that must be accomplished. But We will save those who guarded against evil and leave the wrongdoers there, humbled on their knees.When Our clear signs are presented to them, the disbelievers say to the believers, "Which of us is better in status and appearance?" But how many generations before them have We destroyed, who were even more impressive in wealth and appearance?

Say: "For those who go astray, the Most Gracious extends their time until they see the promised punishment or the Hour. Then they will realize who is in the worst position and weakest in forces."

God increases guidance for those who seek it, and good deeds that last are best in the sight of your Lord for reward and outcome.

Have you seen the one who rejects Our signs and says, "I will surely be given wealth and children"? Has he seen the unseen, or has he made a pact with the Most Gracious? No, We will record what he says and extend his punishment. Everything he talks about will return to Us, and he will come to Us alone.

They have taken other gods besides God to give them power and glory. But these gods will deny their worship and become their adversaries.

Do you not see that We have sent the devils against the disbelievers to incite them? So do not be in haste against them; We are only counting out a limited number of days for them.

On the Day We gather the righteous to the Most Gracious like a band presented before a king for honors, and drive the sinners to Hell like thirsty cattle, none will have the power of intercession except those who have received permission from the Most Gracious.

They say, "The Most Gracious has begotten a son!" Indeed, you have said something monstrous. The skies are ready to burst, the earth to split, and the mountains to fall in ruins because they ascribe a son to the Most Gracious. It is not fitting for the Most Gracious to have a son. Everyone in the heavens and the earth must come to the Most Gracious as a servant. He has counted and numbered them all exactly, and each one will come to Him alone on the Day of Judgment.

For those who believe and do good deeds, the Most Gracious will bestow love. We have made the Qur'an easy in your language so you can give good news to the righteous and warn those who are contentious.

How many generations before them have We destroyed? Can you see any of them or hear even a whisper from them?

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Ta-Ha. We have not sent down the Qur'an to cause you distress, but as a reminder for those who fear God. It is a revelation from Him who created the earth and the high heavens. The Most Gracious is firmly established on the throne of authority. To Him belongs everything in the heavens, on earth, and all between them, and all beneath the soil.If you speak aloud, it doesn't matter because He knows what is secret and even what is more hidden. God! There is no god but Him! He has the most beautiful names.

Have you heard the story of Moses? When he saw a fire, he told his family, "Wait here; I see a fire. Maybe I can bring you a burning brand from it or find some guidance there." When he approached the fire, a voice called out, "O Moses! I am your Lord. Take off your shoes; you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa. I have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed. I am God; there is no god but Me. Serve Me and establish regular prayer to remember Me. The Hour is coming, but I choose to keep it hidden so that every soul may be rewarded according to its efforts. Do not let those who do not believe in it and follow their desires divert you from it, or you will perish."

God asked, "What is that in your right hand, O Moses?" Moses replied, "It is my staff; I lean on it, beat down fodder for my flocks, and have other uses for it." God said, "Throw it down, O Moses!" When he did, it became a snake, moving swiftly. God then said, "Seize it and do not fear; We will return it to its original state. Now, place your hand under your arm; it will come out white and shining without harm. This is another sign. Go to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds."

Moses said, "O my Lord! Expand my chest, ease my task, and remove the impediment from my speech so they may understand what I say. Give me a helper from my family, Aaron, my brother. Strengthen me through him and make him share my task so we may celebrate Your praise and remember You often. You are always watching over us."

God said, "Your request is granted, O Moses. We have shown you favor before. We inspired your mother to put you in a chest and cast it into the river. The river brought you to an enemy of Mine and yours. But I cast love over you so you would be raised under My watchful eye. Your sister went and said, 'Shall I show you someone who will nurse him?' So We returned you to your mother to comfort her and not let her grieve. You killed a man, but We saved you from distress and tested you in various ways. You stayed with the people of Midian for years and then came here as ordained, O Moses. I have prepared you for Myself. Go, you and your brother, with My signs and do not slacken in remembering Me. Go to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds. Speak to him gently so he may take warning or fear God."

Moses and Aaron said, "Our Lord! We fear he may act hastily against us or transgress all bounds." God replied, "Do not fear; I am with you. I hear and see everything.""Don't be afraid. I am with both of you, hearing and seeing everything," said God. "Go to Pharaoh and tell him, 'We are messengers from your Lord. Let the Children of Israel go with us and do not harm them. We bring a sign from your Lord, and peace will be upon those who follow guidance.'"

Moses and Aaron approached Pharaoh and delivered the message. Pharaoh asked, "Who is your Lord, Moses?" Moses replied, "Our Lord is the one who gave everything its form and guided it."

Pharaoh then questioned, "What about the previous generations?" Moses answered, "The knowledge of that is with my Lord, recorded in a book. My Lord never makes mistakes or forgets."

Moses continued, "He made the earth a place for you to live, created paths for you, and sent down water from the sky, producing various plants. Eat and feed your cattle; there are signs in this for those who understand. We created you from the earth, and to it, you will return, and from it, you will be brought out again."

Despite seeing all the signs, Pharaoh rejected and refused them. He accused Moses of using magic to drive them out of their land. Pharaoh challenged Moses to a contest of magic, and Moses agreed, setting the day of the festival as the time for their showdown.

On the day of the festival, Pharaoh gathered his magicians. Moses warned them, "Do not lie against God, or He will destroy you with punishment. Those who lie will fail." The magicians debated among themselves but eventually decided to proceed.

They said to Moses, "Will you throw first, or shall we?" Moses told them to go first. Their ropes and rods appeared to move like snakes due to their magic, causing Moses to feel a moment of fear. But God reassured him, "Do not be afraid; you have the upper hand. Throw what is in your right hand, and it will swallow what they have created. Their magic is just a trick, and magicians will not succeed."

When Moses threw his staff, it devoured the magicians' creations. The magicians then fell in prostration, declaring, "We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses."

Pharaoh, furious, said, "You believe in Him before I give you permission? This must be a plot you devised. I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides and crucify you on palm trees. Then you will know who can give the more severe and lasting punishment."

The magicians responded, "We will never prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us and over the One who created us. Do whatever you will; you can only affect this worldly life.""We believe in our Lord so that He may forgive our sins and the magic you forced us to practice. God is better and everlasting."

"Whoever comes to their Lord as a sinner will face Hell, where they will neither die nor live. But those who come as believers, having done good deeds, will have high ranks in the Gardens of Eternity, where rivers flow beneath. They will dwell there forever as a reward for purifying themselves."

"We inspired Moses to travel by night with My servants and make a dry path through the sea without fear of being overtaken by Pharaoh."

Pharaoh pursued them with his forces, but the sea overwhelmed and covered them. Pharaoh led his people astray instead of guiding them.

"O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, made a covenant with you on the right side of Mount Sinai, and sent down manna and quails. Eat the good things We have provided, but do not commit excess, or My wrath will descend on you. Those who face My wrath are truly lost. However, I am forgiving to those who repent, believe, and do good deeds, and who follow the right path."

When Moses was on the Mount, God asked, "What made you hasten away from your people, O Moses?" Moses replied, "They are close behind me. I hastened to You, my Lord, to please You." God said, "We have tested your people in your absence, and the Samiri has led them astray."

Moses returned to his people, angry and sorrowful. He said, "O my people! Did your Lord not make a good promise to you? Did the time seem too long, or did you desire that wrath should descend from your Lord, so you broke your promise to me?"

They replied, "We did not break our promise to you willingly, but we were burdened with the ornaments of the people, and we threw them into the fire as the Samiri suggested." The Samiri then brought out a calf that seemed to low, and they said, "This is your god and the god of Moses, but he has forgotten."

Moses asked, "Could they not see that it could not return a word to them and had no power to harm or benefit them?" Aaron had already told them, "O my people! You are being tested with this. Your Lord is the Most Gracious, so follow me and obey my command." But they said, "We will not abandon this cult until Moses returns to us."

Moses said to Aaron, "What kept you back when you saw them going wrong? Did you disobey my order?" Aaron replied, "O son of my mother! Do not seize me by my beard or my head. I feared you would say I caused division among the Children of Israel and did not respect your word."

Moses then asked Samiri, "What is your case?" Samiri replied, "I saw what they did not see. I took a handful of dust from the footprint of the Messenger and threw it into the calf. My soul suggested this to me."Moses said, "Leave! Your punishment in this life will be that you will say, 'Do not touch me.' And you have a promise that will not fail in the future. Look at your god, which you have worshipped. We will burn it and scatter its ashes into the sea."

"Your only God is God. There is no god but Him. He knows everything."

"We share these stories with you, Muhammad, as a reminder from Us. If anyone turns away from it, they will bear a heavy burden on the Day of Judgment. They will remain in this state, and it will be a grievous burden for them on that Day."

"On the Day when the Trumpet is blown, we will gather the sinful, terrified. They will whisper to each other, 'We only stayed for ten days.' We know best what they will say when their leader says, 'You only stayed for a day.'"

"They ask you about the mountains. Say, 'My Lord will scatter them as dust and leave the land flat and smooth. You will see no crookedness or unevenness.'"

"On that Day, they will follow the Caller without deviation. All voices will be hushed before the Most Gracious, and you will hear only a faint murmur."

"On that Day, no intercession will help except for those whom God allows and whose word He accepts. He knows what is before them and what is behind them, but they cannot comprehend it."

"All faces will be humbled before the Living, the Eternal. Those who carry wrongdoing will be failures. But those who do good deeds and believe will have no fear of injustice or deprivation."

"We have sent down this Arabic Qur'an and explained it in detail so that they may fear God or be reminded of Him."

"Exalted is God, the True King! Do not be hasty with the Qur'an before its revelation is completed to you, and say, 'My Lord, increase me in knowledge.'"

"We made a covenant with Adam, but he forgot, and we found no determination in him. When we said to the angels, 'Prostrate before Adam,' they all did except Iblis, who refused."

"We said, 'O Adam, this is an enemy to you and your wife. Do not let him drive you both out of the Garden, or you will be miserable. You will not go hungry or naked there, nor suffer from thirst or the sun's heat.'"

"But Satan whispered to him, 'O Adam, shall I lead you to the Tree of Eternity and a kingdom that never decays?' They both ate from the tree, and their nakedness became apparent. They began to cover themselves with leaves from the Garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord and went astray."

"But his Lord chose him, turned to him, and gave him guidance."Then his Lord chose him, turned to him, and guided him. 

God said, "Descend from the Garden, both of you, as enemies to each other. But when guidance comes from Me, whoever follows My guidance will not go astray or be miserable."

"But whoever turns away from My message will have a difficult life, and We will raise him blind on the Day of Judgment."

He will say, "My Lord, why have You raised me blind when I used to see?"

God will respond, "Just as Our signs came to you and you ignored them, so today you will be ignored."

This is how We repay those who go beyond bounds and do not believe in the signs of their Lord. The punishment of the Hereafter is much more severe and lasting.

Is it not a warning to them how many generations We destroyed before them, whose dwellings they now walk through? Surely, there are signs in this for those with understanding.

If it were not for a decree from your Lord and a fixed term, their punishment would have been inevitable.

So be patient with what they say, and praise your Lord before the rising and setting of the sun, and during parts of the night and day, so that you may find joy.

Do not long for the things We have given to some of them for enjoyment, the splendor of this worldly life, through which We test them. The provision of your Lord is better and more lasting.

Instruct your people to pray and be constant in it. We do not ask you to provide sustenance; We provide it for you. The reward of the Hereafter is for righteousness.

They say, "Why does he not bring us a sign from his Lord?" Has not a clear sign come to them from the former Books of revelation?

If We had inflicted a penalty on them before this, they would have said, "Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your signs before we were humbled and disgraced."

Say, "Each of us is waiting; wait, therefore, and soon you will know who is on the straight path and who has received guidance."

Chapter 21: The Prophets

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

The time for mankind's reckoning is drawing closer, yet they turn away in heedlessness.

Whenever a renewed message comes to them from their Lord, they listen to it as if it were a joke.

Their hearts are distracted, and the wrongdoers secretly conspire, saying, "Is this man anything more than a mortal like yourselves? Will you succumb to magic while you see it?"

Say, "My Lord knows every word spoken in the heavens and on earth. He is the One who hears and knows all things."

They say, "These are just confused dreams. He made it up. He is just a poet. Let him bring us a sign like the ones sent to the prophets of old."

None of the populations We destroyed before them believed; will these people believe?

Before you, We only sent men whom We inspired. If you do not know, ask those who possess the message.

We did not give them bodies that did not eat food, nor were they exempt from death.We did not give them bodies that didn't need food, nor were they immortal. In the end, We fulfilled Our promise to them, saving those We chose and destroying those who went beyond bounds.

We have revealed a book for you with a message. Will you not understand? How many unjust populations have We destroyed, replacing them with others? When they felt Our punishment coming, they tried to flee. But it was said to them, "Do not flee, return to your comforts and homes so you may be questioned." They cried, "Woe to us! We were wrongdoers!" Their cries continued until We made them like a harvested field, silent and extinguished.

We did not create the heavens and the earth for idle play. If We wanted a pastime, We could have found it within Our presence, but We do not do such things. Instead, We hurl the truth against falsehood, and it destroys it. Woe to you for the false things you ascribe to Us.

To Him belong all creatures in the heavens and on earth. Even those in His presence are not too proud to serve Him and are never weary. They celebrate His praises day and night without pause. Have they taken gods from the earth who can raise the dead? If there were other gods besides God, there would be chaos in the heavens and the earth. Glory to God, the Lord of the Throne, above what they attribute to Him.

He cannot be questioned for His actions, but they will be questioned for theirs. Have they taken other gods besides Him? Say, "Bring your proof. This is the message of those with me and those before me." Most of them do not know the truth and turn away.

We sent no messenger before you without revealing to him that there is no god but Me, so worship Me. They say, "The Most Gracious has begotten offspring." Glory to Him! They are but honored servants. They do not speak before He speaks and act only by His command. He knows what is before them and what is behind them. They intercede only for those He approves, and they stand in awe of Him. If any of them should say, "I am a god besides Him," We would reward them with Hell. Thus, We repay wrongdoers.

Do the unbelievers not see that the heavens and the earth were once joined together, and We split them apart? We made from water every living thing. Will they not believe? We set mountains on the earth to prevent it from shaking and made broad highways for them to pass through so they may receive guidance. We made the heavens a well-guarded canopy, yet they turn away from its signs. He created the night and the day, the sun and the moon, all moving in their orbits.

We did not grant immortality to any man before you. If you die, will they live forever? Every soul will taste death, and We test you with both good and evil as a trial. To Us, you must return.Every soul will experience death, and we test you with both good and bad experiences as a trial. Ultimately, you will return to Us.

When non-believers see you, they mock you, saying, "Is this the one who talks about your gods?" They ridicule the mention of God, the Most Gracious.

Humans are impatient by nature. Soon, I will show you My signs, but don't ask Me to hasten them.

They ask, "When will this promise be fulfilled if you are truthful?" If only the non-believers knew the time when they won't be able to fend off the fire from their faces or backs, and no help will reach them.

It will come upon them suddenly, leaving them stunned, unable to repel it or get any respite.

Many messengers before you were mocked, but those who mocked them were eventually surrounded by the very thing they ridiculed.

Say, "Who can protect you by night and by day from the wrath of God, the Most Gracious?" Yet, they turn away from the mention of their Lord.

Do they have gods who can shield them from Us? They cannot help themselves nor be defended from Us.

We gave these people and their ancestors good things in life until they grew complacent. Do they not see that We gradually reduce the land under their control from its borders? Can they then be the victors?

Say, "I only warn you according to revelation." But the deaf will not hear the call, even when they are warned.

If even a breath of your Lord's punishment touches them, they will say, "Woe to us! We were wrongdoers."

We will set up scales of justice on the Day of Judgment, so no soul will be treated unjustly. Even if it is as small as a mustard seed, We will bring it to account. We are sufficient to take account.

In the past, We granted Moses and Aaron the criterion for judgment, a light, and a message for those who would do right.

Those who fear their Lord in their most secret thoughts and who hold the Day of Judgment in awe.

This is a blessed message that We have sent down. Will you then reject it?

We bestowed upon Abraham his righteousness, and We were well aware of him.

He said to his father and his people, "What are these images to which you are so devoted?"

They replied, "We found our ancestors worshipping them."

He said, "Indeed, you and your ancestors have been in manifest error."

They asked, "Have you brought us the truth, or are you joking?"

He said, "No, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, who created them, and I am a witness to this truth."

"And by God, I have a plan for your idols after you turn your backs."

So he broke them into pieces, except for the biggest one, so they might turn to it.

They said, "Who has done this to our gods? He must indeed be a wrongdoer!"

They said, "We heard a youth talk about them; he is called Abraham."

They said, "Then bring him before the people so they may witness."

They asked, "Are you the one who did this to our gods, O Abraham?"

He replied, "No, this was done by their biggest one. Ask them if they can speak."

So they turned to themselves and said, "Surely, you are the ones in the wrong!"They turned to each other and admitted, "You know these idols can't speak!" Abraham responded, "Do you worship things besides God that can't benefit or harm you? Shame on you and what you worship besides God! Don't you understand?" They decided, "Burn him and defend your gods if you can!" But God said, "O fire, be cool and safe for Abraham!" They plotted against him, but God made them the losers. God saved Abraham and Lot, guiding them to a blessed land. He also blessed Abraham with Isaac and Jacob, making them righteous leaders who guided others by God's command, performed good deeds, prayed regularly, and gave charity.

God granted Lot wisdom and knowledge, saving him from a corrupt town. He was righteous and received God's mercy. Remember Noah, who called out to God and was saved from great distress along with his family. God drowned those who denied His signs. David and Solomon judged a case about a field damaged by sheep, and God witnessed their judgment. Solomon was given the right understanding, and both were granted wisdom and knowledge. God made the mountains and birds praise Him with David and taught him to make protective armor. Solomon controlled the wind and had rebellious beings dive for him, all under God's protection.

Remember Job, who cried out to God in distress, and God relieved his suffering, restoring his family and doubling their number as a mercy. Isma'il, Idris, and Zul-kifl were all patient and righteous, receiving God's mercy. Zun-nun (Jonah) called out from the darkness, acknowledging his wrongdoing, and God saved him from distress. Zakariya prayed for offspring, and God granted him Yahya (John), curing his wife's barrenness. These prophets were quick to do good, called on God with love and reverence, and humbled themselves before Him.They used to compete in doing good deeds, calling upon Us with hope and fear, and they were humble before Us. So We responded to him and gave him Yahya (John) and made his wife capable of bearing a child. They were always quick to do good, calling upon Us with hope and fear, and they were humble before Us.

And remember her who guarded her chastity: We breathed into her of Our spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for all peoples. This religion of yours is one religion, and I am your Lord, so worship Me. But later generations divided their religion among themselves, yet all will return to Us.

Whoever does good deeds and has faith, their efforts will not be rejected; We will record it in their favor. But there is a ban on any population We have destroyed: they shall not return until Gog and Magog are let through, and they swarm from every hill. Then the true promise will draw near, and the eyes of the unbelievers will stare in horror, saying, "Woe to us! We were heedless of this; indeed, we were wrongdoers!"

You and what you worship besides God are fuel for Hell; you will surely come to it. If these had been gods, they would not have come there, but all will abide therein. There, sobbing will be their lot, and they will not hear anything else. Those for whom the good record from Us has gone before will be removed far from it. They will not hear the slightest sound of Hell, and they will dwell in what their souls desire.

The Great Terror will not grieve them, and the angels will greet them, saying, "This is your Day, the Day you were promised." On the Day when We roll up the heavens like a scroll, as We produced the first creation, so shall We produce a new one. This is a promise We have undertaken, and We will fulfill it.

Before this, We wrote in the Psalms, after the Message given to Moses: "My righteous servants shall inherit the earth." Indeed, in this Qur'an is a message for people who would truly worship God. We sent you only as a mercy for all creatures. Say: "What has come to me by inspiration is that your God is One God; will you then submit?"

But if they turn back, say: "I have proclaimed the Message to you all alike and in truth; but I do not know whether what you are promised is near or far." He knows what is said openly and what you hide. I do not know if this may be a trial for you and a provision for a time. Say: "O my Lord! Judge in truth! Our Lord Most Gracious is the One Whose assistance should be sought against the blasphemies you utter!"

Chapter 22: AL-HAJJ (THE PILGRIMAGE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

O mankind! Fear your Lord! The convulsion of the Hour of Judgment will be a terrible thing. On the Day you see it, every nursing mother will forget her nursling, and every pregnant woman will drop her load. You will see mankind as if in a drunken riot, yet not drunk, but dreadful will be the Wrath of God.

Among men, there are those who dispute about God without knowledge and follow every evil one obstinate in rebellion. It is decreed that whoever turns to him for friendship, he will lead them astray and guide them to the penalty of the Fire.O humanity! If you doubt the Resurrection, consider that We created you from dust, then from a drop of sperm, then from a clot, then from a lump of flesh, both formed and unformed, to show you Our power. We keep some in the womb for a set time, then bring you out as babies, so you may grow to full strength. Some of you die young, while others live to old age, forgetting what they once knew. You see the earth barren, but when We send rain, it stirs to life, swells, and produces beautiful growth.

This is because God is the ultimate truth, the one who gives life to the dead and has power over all things. The Hour of Judgment will come without doubt, and God will raise those in the graves. Yet, some people argue about God without knowledge, guidance, or an enlightening book. They turn away in pride, leading others astray. For them, there is disgrace in this life and the penalty of burning in the Hereafter. This is due to their deeds, for God is never unjust to His servants.

Some people worship God on the edge; if good comes, they are content, but if a trial comes, they turn away, losing both this world and the Hereafter. They call on deities besides God that can neither harm nor benefit them, straying far from the right path. They call on those whose harm is closer than their benefit, making them poor guardians and companions.

God will admit those who believe and do good deeds into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath. God does what He wills. If anyone thinks God will not help His Messenger in this world and the Hereafter, let them try to stop it and see if their plan works. We have sent down clear signs, and God guides whom He wills.

Those who believe, the Jews, the Sabians, the Christians, the Magians, and the polytheists—God will judge between them on the Day of Judgment. God witnesses all things. Do you not see that everything in the heavens and on earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, the hills, the trees, the animals, and many humans bow down to God? But many are also destined for punishment. Those whom God disgraces, no one can honor. God does what He wills.

These two groups (believers and disbelievers) dispute about their Lord. For those who disbelieve, garments of fire will be cut out for them, and boiling water will be poured over their heads, melting their insides and skins.They will also have iron rods to punish them. Every time they try to escape their suffering, they will be forced back and told, "Taste the penalty of burning!" 

God will admit those who believe and do good deeds into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath. They will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments will be of silk. They are guided to the purest of speeches and the path of the Praised One.

Those who reject God and prevent others from His way and the Sacred Mosque, which is open to all, will face a grievous penalty. Anyone who seeks to do wrong there will taste a painful punishment.

We gave Abraham the site of the Sacred House, instructing him not to associate anything with God and to purify the House for those who circle it, stand, bow, and prostrate in prayer. Proclaim the pilgrimage to all people; they will come on foot and on lean camels from distant places to witness benefits and celebrate God's name over the cattle provided for sacrifice. Eat from them and feed the needy.

Complete the prescribed rites, fulfill your vows, and circle the Ancient House. Honoring God's sacred rites is good in His sight. Cattle are lawful for food except those mentioned as exceptions. Avoid the filth of idols and false speech. Be true in faith to God, not assigning partners to Him. Whoever does so is like someone falling from the sky, snatched by birds or blown away by the wind.

Respecting God's symbols, such as the sacrificial animals, comes from piety of heart. These animals provide benefits for a set time, and their place of sacrifice is near the Ancient House. Every nation has appointed rites to celebrate God's name over the sustenance He provided. Your God is One, so submit to Him and give good news to the humble.

Those whose hearts tremble when God is mentioned, who show patience in affliction, keep up regular prayer, and spend in charity from what God has given them, will be rewarded. The sacrificial camels are symbols from God, providing much good. Mention God's name over them when they line up for sacrifice. When they fall, eat from them and feed the contented and the beggars. This is so you may be grateful.

It is not their meat or blood that reaches God, but your piety. God has made them subject to you so you may glorify Him for His guidance. Give good news to those who do right.God does not care about the meat or blood of the sacrificial animals, but He values your piety. He made these animals subservient to you so you can magnify Him for His guidance. Give good news to those who do good.

God will defend those who believe. He does not love traitors or the ungrateful. Permission to fight is given to those who are wronged, and God is powerful enough to help them. Those who have been unjustly expelled from their homes just for saying, "Our Lord is God," will be aided by God. If God did not repel some people by means of others, places of worship would be destroyed. God helps those who help His cause; He is strong and mighty.

Those who, if given power, establish regular prayer, give charity, and promote good while forbidding wrong, will find that all affairs rest with God. If people reject your mission, remember that previous peoples, like those of Noah, 'Ad, Thamud, Abraham, Lot, and Midian, also rejected their prophets. God gave the disbelievers time, but then He punished them severely.

Many towns that were unjust have been destroyed, leaving their buildings in ruins. Do they not travel and learn wisdom? It is not their eyes that are blind, but their hearts. They ask for the punishment to be hastened, but God's promise will not fail. A day with God is like a thousand years of human reckoning. Many towns were given respite despite their wrongdoing, but eventually, they faced punishment. To God is the return of all.

Say, "O people! I am only a plain warner to you." Those who believe and do good deeds will have forgiveness and generous sustenance. Those who strive against God's signs will be companions of the Fire. Every messenger or prophet faced opposition from Satan, but God cancels Satan's influence and confirms His signs. This is a test for those with diseased hearts and hardened hearts. The wrongdoers are in clear opposition.

Those with knowledge will recognize the truth from their Lord and believe in it, humbling their hearts. God guides those who believe to the right path. Disbelievers will remain in doubt until the Hour of Judgment or a day of disaster comes upon them. On that day, God will judge between them. Believers who do good deeds will be in Gardens of Delight, while those who reject faith and deny God's signs will face a humiliating punishment.Those who disbelieve and reject Our signs will face a disgraceful punishment. 

Those who leave their homes for the cause of God and are then killed or die will receive a generous provision from God, who is the best provider. He will admit them to a place they will love, for God is All-Knowing and Most Forbearing.

If someone retaliates only to the extent of the injury they received and is wronged again, God will help them. God is forgiving and merciful. This is because God merges night into day and day into night, and He hears and sees everything. God is the ultimate truth, and anything worshipped besides Him is false. 

Do you not see how God sends down rain, making the earth green? God understands the finest mysteries and is well-acquainted with them. Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him. He is self-sufficient and worthy of all praise. 

God has made everything on earth and the ships that sail the seas subject to you by His command. He withholds the sky from falling on the earth except by His permission. God is kind and merciful to humanity. He gave you life, will cause you to die, and will bring you back to life again. Yet, humans are often ungrateful.

Every people have their own rites and ceremonies. Do not dispute with them about this, but invite them to your Lord, for you are on the right path. If they argue with you, say, "God knows best what you are doing." God will judge between you on the Day of Judgment concerning your differences.

Do you not know that God knows everything in the heavens and the earth? It is all recorded, and that is easy for God. Yet, they worship things besides God for which no authority has been sent down and of which they have no knowledge. For those who do wrong, there is no helper.

When Our clear signs are recited to them, you will see denial on the faces of the disbelievers. They almost attack those who recite Our signs. Say, "Shall I tell you of something worse than these signs? It is the Fire of Hell, promised to the disbelievers, and it is an evil destination."

O people, listen to this parable: Those you call upon besides God cannot create even a fly, and if the fly takes something from them, they cannot retrieve it. Both the seeker and the sought are weak. They have not made a just estimate of God, who is strong and mighty.

God chooses messengers from angels and from humans. He hears and sees everything. He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and all matters return to Him.

O believers, bow down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord, and do good so that you may prosper.Strive sincerely and with discipline for God. He has chosen you and made religion easy for you, following the faith of your forefather Abraham. He named you Muslims before and in this Revelation so that the Messenger may be a witness for you, and you may be witnesses for humanity. Establish regular prayer, give charity, and hold fast to God. He is your Protector, the best to protect and help.

Successful indeed are the believers who humble themselves in their prayers, avoid vain talk, are active in charity, guard their modesty except with their spouses or those their right hands possess, and faithfully observe their trusts and covenants. They will inherit Paradise and dwell there forever.

We created man from clay, then made him a drop of sperm in a secure place, then a clot, then a lump, then bones clothed with flesh, and finally another creation. Blessed be God, the best to create. After that, you will die and be raised again on the Day of Judgment.

We created seven heavens above you and are never unmindful of creation. We send down water from the sky in due measure, causing it to soak into the soil, and we can easily drain it off. With it, we grow gardens of date-palms and vines with abundant fruits for you to eat. We also created a tree from Mount Sinai that produces oil and relish for food.

In cattle, there is a lesson for you. We produce milk for you to drink and many other benefits, including meat. You are carried on them and on ships.

We sent Noah to his people, saying, "O my people, worship God. You have no other god but Him. Will you not fear Him?" The chiefs of the unbelievers among his people said, "He is just a man like you, trying to assert his superiority. If God had wished, He could have sent down angels. We never heard such a thing from our ancestors." They said, "He is possessed; wait and have patience with him for a time."

Noah said, "O my Lord, help me, for they accuse me of falsehood." We inspired him to construct the Ark under Our guidance. When Our command comes and the earth gushes forth, take pairs of every species and your family, except those against whom the Word has already gone forth. Do not plead with Me for the wrong-doers; they will be drowned. When you embark on the Ark, say, "Praise be to God, who has saved us from the wrong-doers."When you and those with you are safely on the Ark, say: "Praise be to God, who saved us from the wrongdoers." And when you disembark, say: "O my Lord, let me land with Your blessing, for You are the best to enable us to land."

Indeed, there are signs in this for people to understand, as We continually test humanity. After them, We raised another generation and sent them a messenger from among themselves, saying, "Worship God; you have no other god but Him. Will you not fear Him?"

The leaders of his people, who disbelieved and denied the Hereafter, and whom We had blessed with the good things of this life, said, "He is just a man like you, eating and drinking as you do. If you follow a man like yourselves, you will surely be lost. Does he promise that when you die and become dust and bones, you will be brought forth again? Far-fetched is what you are promised! There is nothing but our life in this world; we die and we live, and we will not be resurrected. He is just a man who has invented a lie against God, and we will not believe in him."

The prophet said, "O my Lord, help me, for they accuse me of falsehood." God replied, "In a little while, they will surely be sorry." Then the Blast overtook them justly, and We made them like debris. So away with the people who do wrong!

After them, We raised other generations. No people can hasten their term, nor can they delay it. We sent our messengers in succession; every time a messenger came to a people, they accused him of falsehood. So We made them follow one another in punishment and made them stories. So away with people who do not believe!

Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and clear authority to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they behaved arrogantly and were an insolent people. They said, "Shall we believe in two men like ourselves, while their people are subject to us?" So they denied them and became of those who were destroyed.

We gave Moses the Book so that they might receive guidance. We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign and gave them shelter on high ground, affording rest and security with springs.

O messengers, enjoy good and pure things and work righteousness, for I am well-acquainted with all that you do. This community of yours is a single community, and I am your Lord, so fear Me. But people have divided their religion into sects, each rejoicing in what they have. So leave them in their confused ignorance for a time.

Do they think that because We have granted them abundance of wealth and sons, We are hastening to them with good things? No, they do not understand. Those who live in awe of their Lord, who believe in His signs, who do not associate partners with Him, and who give charity with hearts full of fear because they will return to their Lord, these are the ones who hasten in every good work and are foremost in them.We do not place a burden on any soul greater than it can bear. We have a record that clearly shows the truth, and no one will be wronged. But their hearts are in confused ignorance, and they continue with their deeds. When We seize those who enjoyed the good things of this world with punishment, they will cry out in supplication. But it will be said, "Do not cry out for help today; you will not be helped by Us."

"My signs were recited to you, but you turned away in arrogance, talking nonsense about the Quran as if it were fables told at night. Do they not ponder over the Word of God, or has something new come to them that did not come to their ancestors? Or do they not recognize their Messenger, so they deny him? Or do they say, 'He is possessed'? No, he has brought them the truth, but most of them hate the truth.

If the truth had followed their desires, the heavens and the earth and everything in them would have been corrupted. But We have sent them their reminder, and they turn away from it. Do you ask them for any recompense? The recompense of your Lord is best, for He is the best provider. You call them to the straight path, but those who do not believe in the Hereafter are deviating from that path.

If We had mercy on them and removed their distress, they would persist in their transgression, wandering blindly. We have already inflicted punishment on them, but they did not humble themselves to their Lord, nor did they pray. When We open a gate of severe punishment for them, they will be plunged into despair.

It is He who created for you hearing, sight, and understanding, yet you give little thanks. He has multiplied you through the earth, and to Him, you will be gathered back. He gives life and death, and He controls the alternation of night and day. Do you not understand?

They say things similar to what the ancients said: 'When we die and become dust and bones, will we really be raised up again?' They say, 'This has been promised to us and our ancestors before; these are just tales of the ancients.'

Say, 'To whom does the earth and everything in it belong, if you know?' They will say, 'To God.' Say, 'Will you not then receive admonition?' Say, 'Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Throne Supreme?' They will say, 'They belong to God.' Say, 'Will you not then be filled with awe?'

Say, 'Who is it in whose hands is the governance of all things, who protects all but is not protected by any?' They will say, 'It belongs to God.' Say, 'Then how are you deluded?' We have sent them the truth, but they practice falsehood.

God has not chosen any son, nor is there any god along with Him. If there were many gods, each would have taken away what he created, and some would have lorded over others. Glory to God, He is free from what they attribute to Him. He knows everything.God knows everything, both seen and unseen, and is far above the partners they attribute to Him. Say, "My Lord, if You show me what they are warned about, do not place me among the wrongdoers." We are fully capable of showing you what We have promised them. Repel evil with what is best; We are aware of what they say. Say, "My Lord, I seek refuge in You from the suggestions of the evil ones, and I seek refuge in You, my Lord, lest they come near me."

When death comes to one of them, they will say, "My Lord, send me back so I can do good in what I neglected." But no, it is just a word they say. Behind them is a barrier until the Day they are raised up. When the Trumpet is blown, there will be no relationships between them that day, nor will they ask about one another. Those whose good deeds are heavy will be successful, but those whose deeds are light will have lost their souls and will abide in Hell. The fire will burn their faces, and they will be in severe affliction.

God will say, "Were not My signs recited to you, and you treated them as falsehood?" They will reply, "Our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we went astray. Our Lord, bring us out of this; if we return to evil, then we are truly wrongdoers." God will say, "Be driven into it and do not speak to Me."

There was a group of My servants who prayed, "Our Lord, we believe, so forgive us and have mercy on us, for You are the Best of those who show mercy." But you ridiculed them until you forgot My message while laughing at them. Today, I have rewarded them for their patience; they are the ones who have achieved bliss.

God will ask, "How many years did you stay on earth?" They will say, "We stayed a day or part of a day; ask those who keep count." God will say, "You stayed but a little, if only you knew. Did you think We created you in jest and that you would not be brought back to Us?"

Exalted be God, the True King. There is no god but Him, the Lord of the Throne of Honor. Whoever invokes another god besides God has no proof, and their reckoning is with their Lord. Disbelievers will not succeed. Say, "My Lord, forgive and have mercy, for You are the Best of those who show mercy."

Chapter 24: The Light (Al-Noor)
In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

This is a chapter We have revealed and made obligatory, with clear signs so you may take heed. The woman and man guilty of adultery or fornication should each be flogged with a hundred stripes. Do not let compassion move you in their case if you believe in God and the Last Day, and let a group of believers witness their punishment. An adulterer should only marry an adulteress or an idolatress, and an adulteress should only marry an adulterer or an idolater. This is forbidden to believers.If someone accuses honorable women without providing four witnesses, they should be flogged with eighty stripes and their testimony should never be accepted again, as they are wicked transgressors. However, if they repent and change their ways, God is forgiving and merciful.

For those who accuse their spouses without any evidence except their own, their testimony can be accepted if they swear four times by God that they are telling the truth. The fifth oath should invoke God's curse on themselves if they are lying. This process can also be used by the accused spouse to avert punishment by swearing four times that the accusation is false and invoking God's wrath on themselves if the accuser is truthful.

If it weren't for God's grace and mercy, a severe penalty would have befallen you for your hasty actions. Those who spread slander among believers will face a grievous penalty in this life and the Hereafter. God knows, and you do not.

Believers should not follow Satan's footsteps, as he commands shameful and wrong actions. Without God's grace and mercy, none of you would be pure, but God purifies whom He pleases. God is all-hearing and all-knowing.

Those blessed with grace and means should not swear against helping their kin, the needy, and those who have left their homes for God's cause. They should forgive and overlook, as they would want God to forgive them. God is forgiving and merciful.

Those who slander chaste, believing women are cursed in this life and the Hereafter and will face a grievous penalty.On the Day of Judgment, people's tongues, hands, and feet will testify against them about their actions. On that day, God will give everyone their due, and they will realize that God is the ultimate truth. 

Impure women are for impure men, and pure women are for pure men. Those who are pure are not affected by what others say; they will receive forgiveness and honorable provisions.

Believers, do not enter houses other than your own without permission and greeting those inside. If no one is home, do not enter until you have permission. If you are asked to leave, do so, as it is purer for you. God knows everything you do.

It is not wrong to enter uninhabited houses that serve some purpose for you. God knows what you reveal and what you conceal.

Tell believing men to lower their gaze and guard their modesty; this will make them purer. God is aware of all their actions.

Tell believing women to lower their gaze, guard their modesty, and not display their beauty except what is apparent. They should cover their chests and not reveal their beauty except to their husbands, fathers, husbands' fathers, sons, husbands' sons, brothers, brothers' sons, sisters' sons, their women, their slaves, male attendants who lack vigor, or children who do not understand women's hidden aspects. They should not stamp their feet to reveal their hidden ornaments. All believers should turn to God to attain success.

Marry those among you who are single or the virtuous ones among your slaves. If they are poor, God will provide for them out of His grace. God is all-encompassing and all-knowing.

Those who cannot afford to marry should remain chaste until God provides for them. If your slaves seek a contract for freedom, grant it if you see any good in them and give them some of God's wealth. Do not force your slave girls into prostitution if they desire chastity. If they are compelled, God is forgiving and merciful to them.

We have sent down clear revelations to you, examples from those who passed away before you, and admonitions for those who fear God.

God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. His Light is like a niche with a lamp inside, the lamp enclosed in glass, shining like a brilliant star. It is lit from a blessed olive tree, neither of the east nor the west, whose oil almost glows even without being touched by fire. Light upon light. God guides to His Light whom He wills and sets forth parables for people. God knows all things.In houses that God has permitted to be honored, His name is celebrated morning and evening. These are places where people are not distracted by trade or commerce from remembering God, performing regular prayers, and giving charity. They fear the Day when hearts and eyes will be transformed.

God will reward them for their best deeds and increase their rewards out of His grace. He provides for whom He wills without measure. 

For those who disbelieve, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert, appearing as water to the thirsty but turning out to be nothing. They will find God there, who will settle their account swiftly. Their state is like deep darkness in a vast ocean, covered by waves and clouds, where they can hardly see their hands. Without God's light, there is no light.

All beings in the heavens and on earth, including birds with outspread wings, celebrate God's praises. Each knows its mode of prayer and praise, and God is aware of all they do. To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and to Him is the final return.

God moves the clouds gently, then joins them together, forming heaps from which rain emerges. He sends down hail from the sky, striking whom He wills and turning it away from whom He wills. The flash of His lightning almost blinds the sight. God alternates night and day, providing a lesson for those who see.

God has created every living creature from water. Some creep on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some on four. God creates what He wills and has power over all things. He has sent down clear signs, guiding whom He wills to a straight path.

Some people say they believe in God and His messenger and claim to obey, but then they turn away. They are not true believers. When summoned to God and His messenger for judgment, some decline to come. If the right is on their side, they come willingly. 

Is there a disease in their hearts, or do they doubt, or fear that God and His messenger will be unjust? No, they are the wrongdoers. True believers respond to God and His messenger by saying, "We hear and we obey," and they are the successful ones. Those who obey God and His messenger, fear God, and do right will be victorious.

Some swear their strongest oaths by God that if commanded, they would leave their homes. Say, "Do not swear; obedience is more reasonable. God is well aware of what you do.""Don't swear; reasonable obedience is what is desired. God knows what you do. Say: 'Obey God and the Messenger. If you turn away, he is only responsible for his duty, and you for yours. If you obey him, you will be rightly guided. The Messenger's duty is only to convey the clear message.'

God has promised those who believe and do good deeds that He will grant them authority on earth, just as He did for those before them. He will establish their religion and replace their fear with security. They will worship Him alone and not associate anything with Him. Those who reject faith after this are rebellious.

Establish regular prayer, give charity, and obey the Messenger so that you may receive mercy. Don't think that disbelievers can escape God's plan on earth; their abode is the Fire, a terrible refuge.

Believers, let those under your care and children who haven't reached puberty ask for permission to enter your presence at three times: before morning prayer, during midday rest, and after night prayer. These are your times of privacy. Outside these times, it is not wrong for you or them to move about attending to each other. God makes His signs clear to you; He is full of knowledge and wisdom.

When children reach puberty, let them ask for permission as those before them did. God makes His signs clear to you; He is full of knowledge and wisdom.

Elderly women past the prospect of marriage can lay aside their outer garments without showing off their beauty, but it is better for them to be modest. God sees and knows all things.

There is no blame on the blind, the lame, the sick, or yourselves if you eat in your own houses or those of your relatives or friends. There is no sin whether you eat together or separately. When you enter houses, greet each other with a greeting of blessing and purity from God. God makes His signs clear to you so that you may understand.

True believers believe in God and His Messenger. When they are with him on a matter requiring collective action, they do not leave without asking for his permission. Those who ask for permission believe in God and His Messenger. If they ask for leave for some business, give permission to those you will and ask God for their forgiveness. God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Do not consider the Messenger's summons among yourselves like a call to one another. God knows those who slip away under some excuse. Let those who oppose the Messenger's order beware, lest a trial or a grievous penalty befall them."Do not treat the Messenger's call to you as if it were just any ordinary call. God knows those who sneak away, hiding themselves. Let those who oppose his orders be cautious, lest they face a trial or a severe punishment.

Remember, everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God. He knows your intentions and actions. One day, you will be brought back to Him, and He will reveal the truth of what you did. God is all-knowing.

Chapter 25: AL-FURQAN (THE CRITERION)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Blessed is He who sent down the Criterion to His servant, as a warning to all people. He owns the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He has no son and no partner in His rule. He created everything and determined its measure.

Yet, people have taken other gods besides Him, gods that create nothing and are themselves created. These gods cannot control harm or benefit, nor can they control death, life, or resurrection.

The disbelievers say, "This is just a lie he has made up, with the help of others." In truth, they are the ones who are unjust and false. They say, "These are just ancient tales he has written down, and they are read to him morning and evening."

Say, "The Qur'an was sent down by Him who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. He is always Forgiving and Merciful."

They say, "What kind of messenger is this who eats food and walks in the markets? Why hasn't an angel been sent down to him to warn with him?" Or, "Why hasn't a treasure been given to him, or why doesn't he have a garden to enjoy?" The wicked say, "You are following a man who is bewitched."

See what kinds of comparisons they make for you! They have gone astray and cannot find the right path.

Blessed is He who, if He wills, can give you better things than these—gardens with rivers flowing beneath and palaces to live in.

But they deny the Hour (of Judgment). For those who deny the Hour, We have prepared a blazing fire. When it sees them from a distance, they will hear its fury and raging sigh. When they are thrown into a narrow place in it, chained together, they will plead for destruction.

They will be told, "Do not plead for one destruction, but plead for many destructions!"

Say, "Is that better, or the eternal garden promised to the righteous? That will be their reward and destination. They will have everything they desire there, living forever. This is a promise from your Lord that must be fulfilled."

On the day He gathers them and those they worship besides God, He will ask, "Was it you who led these My servants astray, or did they stray from the path themselves?"

They will say, "Glory to You! It was not for us to take any protectors besides You. But You gave them and their fathers good things until they forgot the message and became lost."

God will say, "Now they have proven you liars in what you say. You cannot avert the penalty nor get help." And whoever among you does wrong, We will make him taste a severe punishment.

The messengers We sent before you were all men who ate food and walked through the streets. We have...We have always sent messengers who ate food and walked in the markets. We made some of you a test for others to see if you would be patient. Your Lord sees everything.

Those who don't fear meeting Us say, "Why aren't angels sent to us, or why don't we see our Lord?" They are arrogant and insolent.

On the day they see the angels, there will be no joy for the sinners. The angels will say, "There is a barrier forbidden to you."

We will turn their deeds into scattered dust. The companions of the Garden will have a better place to stay and rest.

On the day the heavens are split with clouds and angels descend, the true dominion will belong to the Most Merciful. It will be a hard day for disbelievers.

The wrongdoer will bite his hands and say, "I wish I had taken the right path with the Messenger! Woe to me! I wish I hadn't taken that person as a friend! He led me astray from the message after it had come to me. Satan is a traitor to man."

The Messenger will say, "O my Lord! My people have abandoned this Qur'an."

We have made enemies for every prophet among the sinners, but your Lord is enough as a guide and helper.

Those who reject faith say, "Why isn't the Qur'an revealed all at once?" We revealed it gradually to strengthen your heart.

They bring arguments, but We reveal the truth and the best explanation.

Those who will be gathered to Hell on their faces are in the worst plight and most astray.

We gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron as his helper. We commanded them to go to the people who rejected Our signs, and We destroyed those people completely.

The people of Noah, when they rejected the messengers, were drowned and made a sign for mankind. We have prepared a grievous penalty for wrongdoers.

We also destroyed 'Ad, Thamud, the Companions of the Rass, and many generations between them. We set forth parables and examples for each, and each was utterly annihilated.

The unbelievers must have passed by the town that was rained with evil. Did they not see it? They do not fear the Resurrection.

When they see you, they mock, saying, "Is this the one whom God has sent as a messenger?" They almost led us away from our gods if we hadn't been steadfast. They will know who is most misled when they see the penalty.

Have you seen the one who takes his own desires as his god? Can you be a guardian over him? Most of them do not listen or understand; they are like cattle, but even more astray."Have you not seen how your Lord extends the shadow? If He wanted, He could make it stay still, but He made the sun its guide. Then, He gradually draws it back to Himself. He is the One who made the night a covering for you, sleep a rest, and the day a time to rise again. He sends the winds as good news before His mercy, and He sends down pure water from the sky to give life to a dead land and to quench the thirst of many creatures, including humans and animals. We distribute the water among them so they may remember and be grateful, but most people are ungrateful.

If We wanted, We could have sent a warner to every town. So, do not obey the disbelievers but strive against them with the Qur'an. He is the One who let the two seas flow freely, one sweet and palatable, the other salty and bitter, and He placed a barrier between them. He created humans from water and established relationships of lineage and marriage. Yet, they worship things besides God that can neither benefit nor harm them. The disbeliever is always against his Lord.

We sent you, Muhammad, only to give good news and warnings. Say, 'I ask no reward from you except that whoever wills may take a path to his Lord.' Trust in the Ever-Living who never dies and celebrate His praise. He is fully aware of His servants' faults. He created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six days and is firmly established on the Throne. When it is said to them, 'Prostrate to the Most Gracious,' they ask, 'What is the Most Gracious?' and it increases their aversion.

Blessed is He who made constellations in the sky and placed a lamp and a moon giving light. He made the night and day follow each other for those who wish to remember or be grateful. The servants of the Most Gracious walk on the earth humbly, and when the ignorant address them, they say, 'Peace.' They spend the night in adoration of their Lord, prostrating and standing. They pray, 'Our Lord, avert from us the punishment of Hell, for its punishment is a grievous affliction. It is an evil abode and place to rest.'

They are neither extravagant nor stingy when they spend but hold a just balance. They do not invoke any other god besides God, do not kill unjustly, and do not commit fornication. Whoever does this will face punishment, but those who repent, believe, and do righteous deeds will have their evil deeds changed into good by God, who is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."Those who repent, believe, and do good deeds will have their past wrongs transformed into good deeds by God, who is always forgiving and merciful. Whoever repents and does good has truly turned to God with sincere repentance. Those who avoid falsehood and pass by frivolity with dignity, and who, when reminded of their Lord's signs, do not ignore them, are praised. They pray for righteous spouses and offspring, and for the strength to lead a righteous life. These individuals will be rewarded with the highest place in heaven for their patience and will be greeted with peace.

Say to the disbelievers: "My Lord would not care for you if you did not call on Him, but since you have rejected the truth, judgment will come." 

Chapter 26: The Poets

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

These are verses of the clear Book. You may grieve that they do not believe. If We willed, We could send down a sign from the sky that would force them to believe. But whenever a new message comes from the Most Gracious, they turn away. They have rejected the truth, but soon they will know the reality of what they mocked.

Do they not see how many noble things We have produced on the earth? There is a sign in this, but most do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

When your Lord called Moses, saying, "Go to the wrongdoing people, the people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear God?" Moses said, "My Lord, I fear they will deny me, and my chest will tighten, and my speech will not be fluent. So, send Aaron with me. They also have a charge against me, and I fear they may kill me." God said, "By no means! Go, both of you, with Our signs. We are with you, listening."

"Go to Pharaoh and say, 'We are messengers from the Lord of the worlds. Let the Children of Israel go with us.'" Pharaoh said, "Did we not raise you among us as a child? And you stayed with us for many years. And you did that deed of yours, and you are ungrateful." Moses said, "I did it when I was astray. So, I fled from you when I feared you. But my Lord granted me wisdom and made me one of the messengers. And is this the favor you remind me of, that you have enslaved the Children of Israel?"

Pharaoh asked, "What is the Lord of the worlds?" Moses replied, "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, if you are certain." Pharaoh said to those around him, "Do you not hear?" Moses continued, "Your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers." Pharaoh said, "Your messenger who has been sent to you is surely mad." Moses said, "The Lord of the East and the West and everything between them, if you understand."Pharaoh said, "If you choose a god other than me, I will certainly imprison you!" Moses replied, "Even if I show you something clear and convincing?" Pharaoh challenged, "Show it then, if you are truthful!" So Moses threw his rod, and it turned into a visible serpent. He also drew out his hand, and it appeared white to all onlookers. Pharaoh said to his chiefs, "This is indeed a skilled magician. His plan is to drive you out of your land with his magic. What do you advise?" They suggested, "Keep him and his brother in suspense and send heralds to gather all the skilled magicians." So the magicians were gathered on an appointed day, and the people were told to assemble. The magicians asked Pharaoh, "Will we have a reward if we win?" Pharaoh assured them, "Yes, and you will be close to me." Moses then said to them, "Throw what you are going to throw!" They threw their ropes and rods, claiming, "By Pharaoh's might, we will surely win!" But when Moses threw his rod, it swallowed up all their falsehoods. The magicians fell down in prostration, declaring, "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds, the Lord of Moses and Aaron." Pharaoh, furious, said, "You believe in Him before I give you permission? He must be your leader who taught you sorcery! I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides and crucify you all!" The magicians responded, "No matter! We will return to our Lord. We hope our Lord will forgive our faults and make us among the foremost believers."

By inspiration, God told Moses, "Travel by night with My servants; you will be pursued." Pharaoh sent heralds to the cities, saying, "These Israelites are a small band, but they are enraged against us. We are a multitude, well-prepared." So they pursued the Israelites at sunrise. When the two groups saw each other, Moses' people said, "We are sure to be overtaken." Moses reassured them, "By no means! My Lord is with me; He will guide me." Then God inspired Moses to strike the sea with his rod. The sea parted, and each part became like a huge, firm mass. The Israelites crossed safely, but the pursuing Egyptians were drowned. This is a sign, but most do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

Recite to them the story of Abraham. He asked his father and his people, "What do you worship?" They replied, "We worship idols and are devoted to them." Abraham questioned, "Do they listen to you when you call on them?"Abraham asked, "Do these idols hear you when you call them? Can they benefit or harm you?" They replied, "No, but we follow what our ancestors did." Abraham said, "Do you see what you and your ancestors have been worshipping? They are enemies to me, except the Lord of the Worlds, who created me and guides me, who gives me food and drink, and who heals me when I am sick. He will cause me to die and then bring me back to life, and I hope He will forgive my faults on the Day of Judgment."

Abraham prayed, "O my Lord, grant me wisdom and join me with the righteous. Give me an honorable mention among later generations and make me one of the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss. Forgive my father, for he is among those who have gone astray. Do not disgrace me on the Day when everyone will be raised up, the Day when neither wealth nor children will be of any benefit, except for those who come to God with a pure heart."

On that Day, the Garden will be brought near to the righteous, and Hell will be in full view of those who went astray. It will be said to them, "Where are the gods you used to worship besides God? Can they help you or help themselves?" They will be thrown into the Fire, along with those who led them astray and the followers of Iblis. They will argue among themselves, saying, "By God, we were clearly in error when we equated you with the Lord of the Worlds. It was the guilty ones who misled us. Now we have no intercessors or any true friends. If only we could return to life, we would be among the believers."

Indeed, there is a sign in this, but most people do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

The people of Noah rejected the messengers. When their brother Noah said to them, "Will you not fear God? I am a trustworthy messenger to you, so fear God and obey me. I do not ask you for any reward; my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds. So fear God and obey me." They said, "Should we believe in you when the lowest people follow you?" Noah replied, "What do I know about what they do? Their account is only with my Lord, if you could understand. I am not here to drive away the believers; I am only a plain warner."

They threatened, "If you do not stop, O Noah, you will be stoned to death." Noah prayed, "O my Lord, my people have rejected me. Judge between me and them openly, and deliver me and the believers with me." So We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and drowned the rest. Indeed, there is a sign in this, but most people do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

The people of 'Ad rejected the messengers. When their brother Hud said to them, "Will you not fear God? I am a trustworthy messenger to you, so fear God and obey me. I do not ask for any reward; my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds. So fear God and obey me."Hud continued, "I don't ask for any reward from you; my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds. Do you build monuments on every high place just for show? Do you construct strong buildings hoping to live forever? When you act, do you do so with absolute power like tyrants? Fear God and obey me. Be mindful of Him who has given you all that you know, including cattle, children, gardens, and springs. I fear for you the punishment of a Great Day."

They responded, "It doesn't matter whether you warn us or not; this is just an old tradition. We won't be punished." So they rejected him, and We destroyed them. Indeed, there is a sign in this, but most people do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

The people of Thamud also rejected the messengers. Their brother Salih said to them, "Will you not fear God? I am a trustworthy messenger to you, so fear God and obey me. I don't ask for any reward from you; my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds. Will you be left secure in your gardens, springs, fields, and palm trees? You carve houses out of mountains with great skill. But fear God and obey me. Do not follow those who are extravagant and spread corruption in the land."

They said, "You are just one of the bewitched. You are a mortal like us. Bring us a sign if you are truthful." Salih said, "Here is a she-camel; she has the right to drink, and you have the right to drink on appointed days. Do not harm her, or the punishment of a Great Day will seize you." But they hamstrung her and regretted it. The punishment seized them. Indeed, there is a sign in this, but most people do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

The people of Lot also rejected the messengers. Their brother Lot said to them, "Will you not fear God? I am a trustworthy messenger to you, so fear God and obey me. I don't ask for any reward from you; my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds. Do you approach males and leave the wives your Lord created for you? You are a people exceeding limits."

They said, "If you don't stop, Lot, you will be cast out." Lot replied, "I detest your actions. My Lord, save me and my family from what they do." So We saved him and his family, except an old woman who stayed behind. Then We destroyed the rest and rained down on them a shower of brimstone. Indeed, there is a sign in this, but most people do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.The people of Midian also denied the messengers. Shu'aib said to them, "Will you not fear God? I am a trustworthy messenger to you, so fear God and obey me. I don't ask for any reward from you; my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds. Give just measure and do not cheat others. Weigh with accurate scales and do not withhold what is due to people. Do not commit evil or spread corruption in the land. Fear Him who created you and the generations before you."

They replied, "You are just one of the bewitched. You are a mortal like us, and we think you are a liar. If you are truthful, make a piece of the sky fall on us." Shu'aib said, "My Lord knows best what you do." But they rejected him, and the punishment of a day of overshadowing gloom seized them. Indeed, there is a sign in this, but most people do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

This is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds, brought down by the Faithful Spirit to your heart, so you may warn in clear Arabic language. It is also mentioned in the scriptures of former peoples. Is it not a sign to them that the learned among the Children of Israel recognize it? If We had revealed it to a non-Arab and he had recited it to them, they would not have believed in it. Thus, We make it enter the hearts of the guilty. They will not believe in it until they see the grievous punishment, which will come upon them suddenly while they do not perceive it. Then they will say, "Can we be given more time?" Do they wish to hasten Our punishment? Have you considered if We let them enjoy themselves for years, and then the punishment they were promised comes to them, it will not benefit them at all.

We never destroyed a population without sending its warners as a reminder, and We are never unjust. The devils did not bring down this revelation; it is not suitable for them, nor are they able to do so. They are far removed from even hearing it. So do not call upon any other god with God, or you will be among those punished. Warn your nearest relatives and be kind to the believers who follow you. If they disobey you, say, "I am free of what you do." Put your trust in the Mighty, the Merciful, who sees you when you stand up to pray and your movements among those who prostrate themselves. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

Shall I inform you on whom the devils descend? They descend on every lying, wicked person who listens eagerly, but most of them are liars. As for poets, the erring follow them. Do you not see that they wander distracted in every valley and say what they do not practice? Except those who believe, work righteousness, remember God often, and defend themselves after they are wronged.The people of Midian also rejected the messengers. Shu'aib told them, "Won't you fear God? I am a trustworthy messenger to you, so fear God and obey me. I don't ask for any reward from you; my reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds. Give fair measure and don't cheat others. Weigh with accurate scales and don't withhold what is due to people. Don't commit evil or spread corruption in the land. Fear Him who created you and the generations before you."

They replied, "You are just one of the bewitched. You are a mortal like us, and we think you are a liar. If you are truthful, make a piece of the sky fall on us." Shu'aib said, "My Lord knows best what you do." But they rejected him, and the punishment of a day of overshadowing gloom seized them. Indeed, there is a sign in this, but most people do not believe. Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.

This is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds, brought down by the Faithful Spirit to your heart, so you may warn in clear Arabic language. It is also mentioned in the scriptures of former peoples. Is it not a sign to them that the learned among the Children of Israel recognize it? If We had revealed it to a non-Arab and he had recited it to them, they would not have believed in it. Thus, We make it enter the hearts of the guilty. They will not believe in it until they see the grievous punishment, which will come upon them suddenly while they do not perceive it. Then they will say, "Can we be given more time?" Do they wish to hasten Our punishment? Have you considered if We let them enjoy themselves for years, and then the punishment they were promised comes to them, it will not benefit them at all.

We never destroyed a population without sending its warners as a reminder, and We are never unjust. The devils did not bring down this revelation; it is not suitable for them, nor are they able to do so. They are far removed from even hearing it. So do not call upon any other god with God, or you will be among those punished. Warn your nearest relatives and be kind to the believers who follow you. If they disobey you, say, "I am free of what you do." Put your trust in the Mighty, the Merciful, who sees you when you stand up to pray and your movements among those who prostrate themselves. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

Shall I inform you on whom the devils descend? They descend on every lying, wicked person who listens eagerly, but most of them are liars. As for poets, the erring follow them. Do you not see that they wander distracted in every valley and say what they do not practice? Except those who believe, work righteousness, remember God often, and defend themselves after they are wronged.

Those who do wrong will soon know what a great reversal they will face! But those who believe, do good works, remember God much, and defend themselves after being wronged will be saved. Those who act unjustly will know to what final place they will turn back.

Chapter 27: AL-NAML (THE ANT, THE ANTS)
Total Verses: 93
Revealed At: Mecca

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

These are verses of the Qur'an, a book that makes things clear; a guide and glad tidings for the believers, who establish regular prayers, give in regular charity, and have full assurance of the hereafter. As for those who do not believe in the hereafter, We have made their deeds pleasing in their eyes, so they wander about in distraction. They will face a grievous penalty, and in the hereafter, they will be the greatest losers.

As for you, the Qur'an is bestowed upon you from the presence of One who is Wise and All-Knowing. Remember when Moses said to his family, "I perceive a fire; soon I will bring you some information or a burning brand to light our fuel, so you may warm yourselves." But when he came to the fire, a voice was heard: "Blessed are those in the fire and those around it. Glory to God, the Lord of the Worlds! O Moses! Verily, I am God, the Exalted in Might, the Wise!"

"Now throw your rod!" But when he saw it moving like a snake, he turned back in retreat and did not return. "O Moses! Fear not; truly, in My presence, messengers have no fear. But if anyone has done wrong and then substituted good for evil, I am Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

"Now put your hand into your bosom, and it will come forth white without harm. These are among the nine signs you will take to Pharaoh and his people, for they are a rebellious people." But when Our signs came to them, they said, "This is sorcery manifest!" And they rejected those signs in iniquity and arrogance, though their souls were convinced of them. So see what was the end of those who acted corruptly!

We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they both said, "Praise be to God, Who has favored us above many of His believing servants!" Solomon was David's heir and said, "O people! We have been taught the speech of birds, and on us has been bestowed a little of all things. This is indeed a manifest grace from God."

Solomon's armies of jinn, men, and birds were gathered before him, and they were kept in order and ranks. When they came to a valley of ants, one of the ants said, "O ants, get into your habitations, lest Solomon and his hosts crush you without knowing it." Solomon smiled, amused at her speech, and said, "O my Lord! Order me to be grateful for Your favors, which You have bestowed on me and my parents, and to do righteousness that will please You. Admit me, by Your grace, to the ranks of Your righteous servants."

He took a muster of the birds and said, "Why do I not see the hoopoe? Is he among the absentees? I will certainly punish him severely or execute him unless he brings me a clear reason for his absence." But the hoopoe did not tarry long and said, "I have discovered something you do not know. I come to you from Sheba with true tidings. I found a woman ruling over them, provided with every requisite, and she has a magnificent throne.""I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given everything, including a magnificent throne. I saw her and her people worshipping the sun instead of God. Satan has made their deeds seem pleasing to them and has led them away from the right path, so they are not guided. They do not worship God, who reveals what is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows what you hide and what you reveal. God, there is no god but Him, the Lord of the Tremendous Throne."

Solomon said, "We will see if you are telling the truth or lying. Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then step back and see what they respond." The Queen of Sheba said, "O chiefs! A noble letter has been delivered to me. It is from Solomon, and it says, 'In the name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. Do not be arrogant against me, but come to me in submission.'"

She asked her chiefs for advice, saying she never makes a decision without consulting them. They replied, "We are strong and ready for war, but the decision is yours, so consider what you will command." She said, "When kings enter a country, they ruin it and make the noblest of its people the lowest. But I will send him a gift and see what response my messengers bring back."

When the messengers came to Solomon, he said, "Do you offer me wealth? What God has given me is better than what He has given you. You are the ones who rejoice in your gift. Go back to them. We will come to them with forces they cannot resist, and we will drive them out in disgrace, and they will be humbled."

Solomon then asked his chiefs, "Which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission?" An 'Ifrit among the jinn said, "I will bring it to you before you rise from your council. I am strong and trustworthy for this task." Another who had knowledge of the Book said, "I will bring it to you in the blink of an eye." When Solomon saw the throne placed before him, he said, "This is by the grace of my Lord, to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful. Whoever is grateful, it is for their own good, and whoever is ungrateful, my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Supreme in Honor."

Solomon then said, "Disguise her throne so we may see if she recognizes it or if she is not rightly guided." When she arrived, she was asked, "Is this your throne?" She replied, "It looks like it." Solomon said, "We were given knowledge before her, and we have submitted to God."

What she worshipped besides God had hindered her, for she came from a disbelieving people. She was then asked to enter the palace. When she saw it, she thought it was a pool of water and bared her legs. Solomon said, "It is a hall made smooth with glass." She said, "My Lord! I have wronged myself, and I submit with Solomon to God, the Lord of the Worlds."

We sent to the Thamud their brother...Salih was sent to the Thamud people, urging them to worship God. However, they split into two opposing groups. Salih asked them, "Why do you seek evil over good? Ask God for forgiveness so you may receive mercy." They blamed their misfortunes on Salih and his followers, but he told them their fate was determined by God and that they were being tested.

In the city, there were nine men who caused trouble and refused to reform. They plotted to attack Salih and his family at night and then deny any involvement. However, God also had a plan, and they were unaware of it. Ultimately, their plot led to their own destruction, leaving their homes in ruins as a sign for those who understand.

God saved those who believed and practiced righteousness. Lot was also sent as a messenger, warning his people against committing shameful acts. He questioned why they pursued men instead of women, calling them ignorant. The people wanted to expel Lot and his followers for wanting to remain pure. God saved Lot and his family, except his wife, who was destined to stay behind. A rain of brimstone was sent upon the disbelievers, serving as a dire warning.

Praise be to God, and peace upon His chosen servants. Who is better, God or the false gods they associate with Him? God created the heavens and the earth, sends rain to grow beautiful gardens, and made the earth a stable place with rivers and mountains. He listens to the distressed, guides through darkness, and sends winds as heralds of His mercy. He originates creation and provides sustenance. None but God knows the unseen, and people are in doubt about the Hereafter, unable to comprehend it fully.Unbelievers question, "What? When we become dust, like our ancestors, will we really be resurrected?" They say, "We were promised this, and so were our fathers before us. These are just old tales." Tell them, "Travel the earth and see the fate of the guilty." Don't grieve over them or be distressed by their plots. They ask, "When will this promise come true, if you are truthful?" Say, "It may be that some of what you wish to hasten is close behind you." Your Lord is full of grace to mankind, but most are ungrateful. He knows all that their hearts hide and reveal. Nothing in the heavens or earth is hidden from Him; it is all recorded. This Qur'an explains to the Children of Israel most of the matters they disagree on. It is a guide and mercy for believers. Your Lord will judge between them with His wisdom; He is Mighty and All-Knowing. Trust in God, for you are on the path of clear truth. You cannot make the dead hear or the deaf listen when they turn away. You cannot guide the blind out of their error; only those who believe in Our signs will listen and submit. When the Word is fulfilled against them, We will bring forth a beast from the earth to speak to them because they did not believe in Our signs. One day, We will gather from every nation a group of those who rejected Our signs, and they will be kept in ranks. When they come before God, He will ask, "Did you reject My signs without understanding them, or what did you do?" The Word will be fulfilled against them because of their wrongdoing, and they will be unable to speak. Have they not seen that We made the night for rest and the day for light? These are signs for those who believe. On the Day the Trumpet is sounded, those in the heavens and on earth will be terrified, except those whom God wills. All will come to Him humbled. You see the mountains and think they are firmly fixed, but they will pass away like clouds. This is the artistry of God, who perfects all things and is aware of all you do. Those who do good will be secure from terror that Day. Those who do evil will be thrown into the Fire. You will be rewarded only for what you have done. I am commanded to serve the Lord of this city, who has sanctified it and to whom all things belong. I am commanded to be among those who submit to God's will and to recite the Qur'an. Whoever accepts guidance does so for their own good, and whoever goes astray, say, "I am only a warner." Say, "Praise be to God, who will soon show you His signs, so you will know them." Your Lord is not unmindful of what you do.Say, "Praise be to God, who will show you His signs so you will recognize them. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do."

Chapter 28: AL-QASAS (THE STORY, STORIES)
Total Verses: 88
Revealed At: MAKKA

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

28:1 Ta. Sin. Mim.
28:2 These are the verses of the Book that make things clear.
28:3 We recount to you some of the story of Moses and Pharaoh in truth, for people who believe.
28:4 Pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into sections, oppressing a small group among them. He killed their sons and spared their women. He was indeed a corrupter.
28:5 We wished to be gracious to those oppressed in the land, to make them leaders and heirs,
28:6 to establish them in the land, and to show Pharaoh, Haman, and their hosts what they feared from them.
28:7 We inspired the mother of Moses, saying, "Nurse him, but when you fear for him, cast him into the river and do not fear or grieve. We will return him to you and make him one of Our messengers."
28:8 Then the people of Pharaoh picked him up, intending that he would become an enemy and a cause of sorrow for them. Pharaoh, Haman, and their hosts were indeed sinners.
28:9 Pharaoh's wife said, "He will be a joy for me and for you. Do not kill him. He may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." But they did not realize what they were doing.
28:10 The heart of Moses' mother was empty, and she almost revealed his identity if We had not strengthened her heart to remain a believer.
28:11 She said to Moses' sister, "Follow him." So she watched him from a distance, and they did not notice.
28:12 We had already forbidden foster mothers for him, so his sister said, "Shall I show you a household that will take care of him for you and be kind to him?"
28:13 Thus, We restored him to his mother so that she might be comforted and not grieve, and so that she might know that the promise of God is true. But most of them do not understand.
28:14 When he reached full age and maturity, We bestowed upon him wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We reward those who do good.
28:15 He entered the city at a time when its people were not watching and found two men fighting—one from his own people and the other from his enemies. The man from his own people called for his help against his foe, so Moses struck him and killed him. He said, "This is a work of Satan, for he is an enemy who clearly misleads."
28:16 He prayed, "O my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul. Forgive me." So God forgave him, for He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
28:17 He said, "O my Lord! For the favor You have bestowed upon me, I will never support the guilty."
28:18 The next morning, he was in the city, fearful and vigilant, when the man who had sought his help the day before called out to him again. Moses said, "You are clearly a troublemaker."
28:19 When he decided to lay hold of the man who was an enemy to both of them, the man said, "O Moses! Do you intend to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? You only want to become a powerful tyrant in the land and not one who sets things right."A man came running from the farthest part of the city and said, "Moses, the chiefs are plotting to kill you. Leave immediately; I am giving you sincere advice." So Moses fled, looking around in fear, and prayed, "My Lord, save me from these wrongdoers."

When he turned towards Midian, he said, "I hope my Lord will guide me to the right path." Upon arriving at a well in Midian, he saw a group of men watering their flocks and two women standing aside with their flocks. He asked, "What is the matter with you?" They replied, "We cannot water our flocks until the shepherds finish. Our father is very old."

Moses then watered their flocks for them and retreated to the shade, praying, "My Lord, I am in desperate need of any good You send me." One of the women approached him shyly and said, "My father invites you to reward you for watering our flocks." When Moses met her father and told his story, the father said, "Do not fear; you have escaped from the unjust people."

One of the women suggested, "Father, hire him. The best man for the job is strong and trustworthy." The father said to Moses, "I intend to marry one of my daughters to you on the condition that you work for me for eight years. If you complete ten, it will be a favor from you. I do not wish to make things difficult for you. You will find me, if God wills, one of the righteous."

Moses agreed, saying, "Let this be the agreement between us. Whichever term I fulfill, there will be no injustice to me. God is a witness to what we say."

After Moses completed the term and was traveling with his family, he saw a fire near Mount Tur. He told his family, "Wait here; I see a fire. Perhaps I can bring you some information or a burning stick to warm yourselves."

When he reached the fire, a voice called from the right side of the valley, from a blessed spot: "Moses, I am God, the Lord of the Worlds. Throw down your staff." When he saw it moving like a snake, he turned to flee, but the voice said, "Moses, come closer and do not fear; you are safe. Put your hand into your bosom, and it will come out white without harm. These are two signs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs, for they are a rebellious people."

Moses said, "My Lord, I have killed one of them, and I fear they will kill me. My brother Aaron is more eloquent in speech than I am. Send him with me as a helper to confirm my words, for I fear they will accuse me of falsehood."

God replied, "We will strengthen you with your brother and give you both authority so they cannot harm you. With Our signs, you and those who follow you will triumph."

When Moses came to Pharaoh with Our clear signs, they said, "This is nothing but fabricated magic. We have never heard of this among our ancestors."Moses responded, "My Lord knows best who brings guidance from Him and who will have the best outcome in the Hereafter. Surely, wrongdoers will not succeed."

Pharaoh then addressed his chiefs, saying, "I know no god for you but myself. Haman, light a kiln to bake bricks and build me a tall tower so I can look at the god of Moses. But I think Moses is lying."

Pharaoh and his followers were arrogant and unjust, thinking they would not be held accountable. So, We seized them and threw them into the sea. Look at the fate of those who did wrong!

We made them leaders who invite to the Fire, and on the Day of Judgment, they will find no help. In this world, they were followed by a curse, and on the Day of Resurrection, they will be among the despised.

We revealed the Book to Moses after destroying earlier generations, to provide insight, guidance, and mercy so that people might take heed.

You (Muhammad) were not on the western side when We decreed the command to Moses, nor were you a witness to those events. But We raised new generations, and their lives were prolonged. You were not among the people of Midian, reciting Our signs to them, but We kept sending messengers.

You were not at the side of Mount Tur when We called to Moses. Yet, We sent you as a mercy from your Lord to warn a people who had no warner before you, so they might take heed.

If We had not sent you to the Quraish, and a calamity had seized them for their deeds, they might have said, "Our Lord, why didn't You send us a messenger? We would have followed Your signs and been believers!"

But now that the Truth has come to them from Us, they say, "Why aren't signs sent to him like those sent to Moses?" Didn't they reject the signs given to Moses before? They say, "These are two kinds of magic supporting each other," and they reject both.

Say, "Then bring a Book from God that provides better guidance than these two, and I will follow it, if you are truthful."

If they do not respond, know that they only follow their desires. Who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from God? God does not guide wrongdoing people.

We have caused the Word to reach them so they might take heed. Those to whom We gave the Book before this believe in it. When it is recited to them, they say, "We believe in it; it is the Truth from our Lord. We were already submitters before this."

They will be given their reward twice because they are steadfast, repel evil with good, and spend in charity from what We have provided them. When they hear vain talk, they turn away and say, "To us our deeds, and to you yours; peace be to you. We do not seek the ignorant."

It is true that you (Muhammad) cannot guide everyone you love, but God guides whom He wills, and He knows best who receives guidance."God guides whom He wills, and He knows best who follows the right path. They say, 'If we follow your guidance, we will be driven out of our land.' But haven't We established for them a secure sanctuary where fruits of all kinds are brought as a provision from Us? Yet most of them do not understand.

How many communities have We destroyed that were ungrateful for their means of livelihood! Their homes are now deserted, except for a few, and We are their inheritors. Your Lord never destroys a population until He has sent a messenger to its center, reciting Our signs to them. We only destroy populations when their people are unjust.

The material things you are given are just conveniences of this life and its glitter, but what is with God is better and more enduring. Will you not then be wise? Is the one to whom We have promised a goodly promise, which he will find true, like the one whom We allow to enjoy the comforts of this life, but who will be among those brought up for punishment on the Day of Judgment?

On that day, God will call to them and say, 'Where are My partners whom you imagined?' Those against whom the charge will be proved will say, 'Our Lord! These are the ones we led astray. We led them astray as we were astray ourselves. We free ourselves from them in Your presence; it was not us they worshipped.'

It will be said to them, 'Call upon your partners for help.' They will call upon them, but they will not listen to them, and they will see the penalty before them. If only they had been open to guidance! On that day, God will call to them and say, 'What was the answer you gave to the messengers?' The whole story will seem obscure to them, and they will not be able to question each other.

But anyone who repents, believes, and works righteousness will have hopes to be among those who achieve salvation. Your Lord creates and chooses as He pleases; they have no choice in the matter. Glory to God, and far is He above the partners they ascribe to Him! Your Lord knows all that their hearts conceal and all that they reveal.

He is God; there is no god but Him. To Him be praise, at the first and at the last. His is the command, and to Him you will be brought back. Say, 'Have you thought, if God made night everlasting for you until the Day of Resurrection, who is a god besides God who could bring you light? Will you not then hear?' Say, 'Have you thought, if God made day everlasting for you until the Day of Resurrection, who is a god besides God who could bring you night wherein you rest? Will you not then see?'

Out of His mercy, He has made for you night and day so that you may rest and seek His grace, and so that you may be grateful. On the Day when He will call to them and say, 'Where are My partners whom you pretended?' We will draw forth from every nation a witness and say, 'Bring your proof.' Then they will know that the truth is God's, and all that they invented will have failed them.

Qarun was doubtless of the people of Moses, but he acted insolently towards them."Korah, who was from the people of Moses, oppressed them. We gave him so much treasure that even the keys to his wealth were a burden for strong men. His people advised him, "Don't be arrogant, for God does not love those who are boastful."

They continued, "Use the wealth God has given you to seek the Hereafter, but don't forget your share of this world. Do good to others as God has been good to you, and don't seek to cause corruption on the earth, for God does not love those who spread corruption."

Korah arrogantly replied, "I have been given this wealth because of my own knowledge." Did he not realize that God had destroyed many generations before him who were stronger and richer than he was? The guilty are not always immediately called to account for their sins.

Korah went out among his people in his splendor, and those who desired the life of this world said, "We wish we had what Korah has; he is truly fortunate." But those who had been given true knowledge said, "Woe to you! The reward of God is better for those who believe and do good deeds, but only those who are patient will attain it."

Then We caused the earth to swallow him and his house. He had no one to help him against God, nor could he defend himself. Those who had envied his position the day before began to say, "It is indeed God who enlarges or restricts provision for any of His servants as He pleases. If God had not been gracious to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us too. The ungrateful never prosper."

The Home of the Hereafter is for those who do not seek to exalt themselves on earth or cause corruption. The best outcome is for the righteous. Whoever does good will receive a reward better than their deed, but those who do evil will only be punished to the extent of their deeds.

He who has given you the Qur'an will bring you back to the Place of Return. Say, "My Lord knows best who brings true guidance and who is in manifest error." You did not expect that the Book would be sent to you except as a mercy from your Lord. Therefore, do not support those who reject God's message.

Do not let anything keep you back from the signs of God after they have been revealed to you. Invite people to your Lord and do not be among those who join gods with God. Do not call upon any other god besides God. There is no god but Him. Everything will perish except His own Face. To Him belongs the command, and to Him you will be brought back.

Chapter 29: The Spider (Al-Ankaboot)
In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

A.L.M. Do people think they will be left alone just because they say, "We believe," and will not be tested? We tested those before them, and God will certainly know those who are true from those who are false. Do those who practice evil think they will escape Us? Evil is their judgment!

For those who hope to meet God, the appointed time is surely coming, and He hears and knows all things. If anyone strives, they do so for their own soul, for God is free of all needs from all creation."And whoever strives, does so for their own benefit, for God is self-sufficient and independent of His creatures. Those who believe and do good deeds, We will erase their bad deeds and reward them according to the best of their actions. We have commanded people to be kind to their parents, but if they pressure you to associate others with Me, do not obey them. You will all return to Me, and I will inform you of what you did. Those who believe and do good deeds will be admitted among the righteous.

Some people say, 'We believe in God,' but when they face hardship for God's sake, they treat it as if it were God's punishment. If help comes from your Lord, they claim, 'We were always with you!' Does God not know what is in the hearts of all creation? God certainly knows those who believe and those who are hypocrites. The disbelievers say to the believers, 'Follow our way, and we will bear your sins.' But they cannot bear any of their sins; they are liars. They will carry their own burdens and other burdens along with their own, and on the Day of Judgment, they will be questioned about their falsehoods.

We sent Noah to his people, and he stayed with them for 950 years. The flood overwhelmed them while they persisted in sin. We saved him and those with him in the Ark, making it a sign for all people. We also saved Abraham, who told his people, 'Serve God and fear Him; that is best for you if you understand. You worship idols besides God and invent falsehoods. Those you worship besides God cannot provide for you. Seek sustenance from God, serve Him, and be grateful to Him; to Him you will return.'

If you reject the message, previous generations also rejected it. The messenger's duty is only to convey the message clearly. Do they not see how God initiates creation and then repeats it? That is easy for God. Say, 'Travel through the earth and see how God originated creation; He will produce a later creation. God has power over all things.' He punishes whom He wills and grants mercy to whom He wills, and to Him you will be returned. You cannot escape Him on earth or in the sky, and besides God, you have no protector or helper.

Those who reject God's signs and the meeting with Him in the Hereafter will despair of His mercy and face a grievous penalty. The response of Abraham's people was to say, 'Kill him or burn him.' But God saved him from the fire. There are signs in this for people who believe. Abraham said, 'You have taken idols besides God out of mutual love in this life, but on the Day of Judgment, you will disown and curse each other, and your abode will be the Fire, with no helpers.' But Lot had faith."Lot believed in Abraham and said, "I am fleeing to my Lord. He is the Mighty, the Wise." We gave Abraham Isaac and Jacob and established prophethood and revelation among his descendants. We rewarded him in this life, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.

Remember Lot, who told his people, "You commit lewdness that no one before you has ever done. Do you approach men, cut off travelers, and practice wickedness in your councils?" His people responded, "Bring us God's punishment if you are truthful." Lot prayed, "O my Lord, help me against these mischievous people."

When Our messengers brought Abraham the good news, they said, "We are going to destroy the people of this town because they are wrongdoers." Abraham said, "But Lot is there." They replied, "We know who is there. We will save him and his followers, except his wife, who will stay behind."

When Our messengers came to Lot, he was distressed and felt powerless to protect them. They reassured him, "Do not fear or grieve. We will save you and your followers, except your wife, who will stay behind." They said, "We will bring down a punishment from heaven on the people of this town because they are wickedly rebellious." We left a clear sign of this for people who understand.

We sent Shu'aib to the people of Midian. He said, "O my people, serve God and fear the Last Day. Do not commit evil on the earth with the intent to do mischief." But they rejected him, and a mighty blast seized them, leaving them prostrate in their homes by morning.

Remember the 'Ad and Thamud people. Their fate is evident from their ruined dwellings. Satan made their deeds seem fair to them and kept them from the right path, though they were intelligent and skilled. Remember Qarun, Pharaoh, and Haman. Moses came to them with clear signs, but they were arrogant on the earth and could not escape Our punishment.

Each of them was seized for their crime. Some were caught by a violent storm, some by a mighty blast, some were swallowed by the earth, and some were drowned. It was not God who wronged them; they wronged themselves.

The parable of those who take protectors other than God is like a spider building a house. The flimsiest of houses is the spider's house if they but knew. God knows whatever they call upon besides Him. He is the Mighty, the Wise. These parables are set forth for mankind, but only those with knowledge understand them.

God created the heavens and the earth in true proportions. This is a sign for those who believe. Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book and establish regular prayer. Prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds, and the remembrance of God is the greatest thing in life. God knows the deeds you do."Remember God is the greatest, and He knows what you do. 

Do not argue with the People of the Book (Jews and Christians) except in a kind and respectful manner, unless they are unjust. Say, 'We believe in what was revealed to us and what was revealed to you. Our God and your God is one, and we submit to Him.'

We have sent down the Book to you, and the People of the Book believe in it, as do some of the pagan Arabs. Only the disbelievers reject our signs. You were not able to read or write before this Book came to you, so those who doubt would have had reason to question it. But these are clear signs in the hearts of those who have been given knowledge, and only the unjust reject them.

They ask, 'Why are no signs sent down to him from his Lord?' Say, 'The signs are with God, and I am just a clear warner.' Is it not enough for them that we have sent down the Book which is recited to them? It is a mercy and a reminder for those who believe.

Say, 'God is enough as a witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. Those who believe in falsehood and reject God are the losers.' They ask you to hasten the punishment. If it were not for an appointed time, the punishment would have already come to them. It will come upon them suddenly when they least expect it.

They ask you to hasten the punishment, but Hell will surely encompass the disbelievers. On the Day when the punishment will cover them from above and below, it will be said, 'Taste what you used to do.'

O My servants who believe! My earth is spacious, so worship Me alone. Every soul will taste death, and then you will be returned to Us. Those who believe and do good deeds will be given a home in Heaven, with lofty mansions beneath which rivers flow, to dwell there forever. What an excellent reward for those who do good!

Those who persevere in patience and put their trust in their Lord. How many creatures do not carry their own sustenance? God provides for them and for you. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

If you ask them who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon, they will certainly reply, 'God.' How are they then deluded away from the truth? God enlarges the sustenance for whom He pleases and restricts it for whom He pleases. He has full knowledge of all things.

If you ask them who sends down rain from the sky and gives life to the earth after its death, they will certainly reply, 'God.' Say, 'Praise be to God!' But most of them do not understand.

The life of this world is just amusement and play, but the Home in the Hereafter is the true life, if they only knew. When they embark on a boat, they call on God, making their devotion sincerely to Him. But when He delivers them safely to land, they start associating others with Him."They are ungrateful for Our gifts and indulge in worldly pleasures, but soon they will realize the truth. Do they not see that We have made a secure sanctuary for them while people around them are being taken away by force? Yet, they believe in falsehood and reject God's grace. Who is more unjust than the one who invents lies about God or denies the truth when it comes to them? Surely, there is a home in Hell for those who reject faith.

Those who strive in Our cause, We will guide them to Our paths. God is with those who do good. 

Chapter 30: AL-ROOM (THE ROMANS, THE BYZANTINES)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Alif. Lam. Mim.
2. The Roman Empire has been defeated
3. In a nearby land, but after their defeat, they will soon be victorious
4. Within a few years. With God is the decision, in the past and in the future. On that day, the believers will rejoice
5. With the help of God. He helps whom He wills, and He is Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.
6. This is the promise of God. God never fails in His promise, but most people do not understand.
7. They only know the outward aspects of the worldly life, but they are heedless of the Hereafter.
8. Do they not reflect within themselves? God did not create the heavens and the earth and everything between them except with truth and for an appointed term. Yet many people deny the meeting with their Lord.
9. Have they not traveled through the earth and seen the end of those before them? They were stronger and cultivated the earth more than these people. Messengers came to them with clear signs, but they wronged themselves by rejecting them.
10. In the end, those who did evil faced a terrible fate because they denied God's signs and mocked them.
11. God begins the process of creation, then repeats it, and then you will be returned to Him.
12. On the Day the Hour is established, the guilty will be struck with despair.
13. They will have no intercessors among their partners, and they will reject their partners.
14. On the Day the Hour is established, people will be sorted out.
15. Those who believed and did good deeds will be made happy in a garden of delight.
16. But those who disbelieved and denied Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter will be brought to punishment.
17. So glorify God when you reach the evening and when you rise in the morning.
18. To Him belongs praise in the heavens and the earth, and in the late afternoon and when the day begins to decline.
19. He brings out the living from the dead and the dead from the living, and He gives life to the earth after its death. Similarly, you will be brought forth.
20. Among His signs is that He created you from dust, and now you are human beings scattered far and wide.
21. And among His signs is that He created for you mates from among yourselves so that you may find tranquility with them, and He has put love and mercy between your hearts. Indeed, in this are signs for those who reflect.Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your languages and colors. These are signs for those who know. Another sign is your sleep by night and day, and your quest for His bounty. These are signs for those who listen. He shows you lightning, both as a fear and a hope, and sends down rain to revive the earth after its death. These are signs for those who understand. The heavens and the earth stand by His command, and when He calls you from the earth, you will emerge. Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him, and all are obedient to Him. He begins creation and then repeats it, and it is easy for Him. He has the highest attributes in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

He gives you an example from your own experience: Do you have partners among those you possess who share equally in the wealth We have given you? Do you fear them as you fear each other? This is how We explain the signs to people who understand. But the wrongdoers follow their desires without knowledge. Who can guide those whom God has left astray? They have no helpers.

So, set your face towards the true faith, the natural way God has created mankind. There is no changing God's creation. This is the right religion, but most people do not know. Turn to Him in repentance, fear Him, establish regular prayers, and do not be among those who join partners with God. Those who divide their religion and become sects, each group rejoicing in what they have.

When trouble touches people, they cry to their Lord, turning to Him in repentance. But when He gives them a taste of His mercy, some of them associate others with their Lord. This is to show their ingratitude for the favors We have bestowed on them. Enjoy your brief time, but soon you will know your folly. Have We sent down authority to them, which points out to them the things they associate with Him?

When We give people a taste of mercy, they rejoice, but when evil befalls them because of their own deeds, they despair. Do they not see that God enlarges and restricts provision for whom He pleases? These are signs for those who believe. So, give what is due to kindred, the needy, and the wayfarer. This is best for those who seek God's pleasure, and they will prosper.

What you lay out for increase through the property of others will have no increase with God, but what you give in charity, seeking God's pleasure, will be multiplied. God created you, provided for you, will cause you to die, and will give you life again. Are there any of your false partners who can do any of these things? Glory to Him, and He is above the partners they attribute to Him!God is the one who created you, provided for you, causes you to die, and brings you back to life. Can any of your false gods do any of these things? Glory to Him, and He is above what they associate with Him!

Corruption has spread on land and sea because of what people have done. This is so they may taste some of their deeds and turn back from evil. Travel the earth and see the fate of those before you; most of them worshipped others besides God.

Set your face towards the true faith before the Day comes from God that cannot be averted. On that Day, people will be divided. Those who reject faith will suffer, while those who do good will prepare for their own benefit. God will reward those who believe and do good deeds out of His bounty. He does not love those who reject faith.

Among His signs is that He sends the winds as heralds of good news, giving you a taste of His mercy, so that ships may sail by His command and you may seek His bounty and be grateful. We sent messengers to their people with clear signs, and those who transgressed faced retribution. It is our duty to help the believers.

God sends the winds to raise clouds, spreads them in the sky, and breaks them into fragments, causing rain to fall where He wills. Before the rain, people were in despair, but when it falls, they rejoice. Look at the signs of God's mercy, how He revives the earth after its death. He will also raise the dead to life, for He has power over all things.

If We send a wind and they see their crops turn yellow, they will continue in disbelief. You cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away. You can only make those hear who believe in Our signs and submit.

God created you in a state of weakness, then gave you strength, and then weakness and grey hair after strength. He creates as He wills, and He is the Knower, the Mighty. On the Day of Reckoning, the transgressors will swear they only tarried for an hour, but they were always deceived. Those with knowledge and faith will say that they tarried until the Day of Resurrection, but they were unaware.

On that Day, excuses will not benefit the unjust, nor will they be allowed to make amends. We have given every kind of example in this Quran, but if you bring them a sign, the unbelievers will say you are just tricksters. God seals the hearts of those who do not understand.

So be patient, for God's promise is true. Do not let those who lack certainty shake your firmness.In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

**Chapter 31: Luqman**

**Verses: 34**

**Revealed at: Mecca**

1. Alif. Lam. Mim.
2. These are the verses of the Wise Book,
3. A guide and a mercy for those who do good,
4. Who establish regular prayer, give regular charity, and have firm belief in the Hereafter.
5. They are on true guidance from their Lord, and they are the ones who will prosper.
6. But among people, there are those who buy idle tales without knowledge to mislead others from God's path and make a mockery of it. For them, there is a humiliating penalty.
7. When Our signs are recited to them, they turn away in arrogance as if they did not hear them, as if there is deafness in their ears. Announce to them a grievous penalty.
8. For those who believe and do righteous deeds, there will be Gardens of Bliss,
9. Where they will dwell forever. This is a true promise from God, and He is Exalted in Power, Wise.
10. He created the heavens without visible pillars, set firm mountains on the earth to prevent it from shaking with you, and spread all kinds of creatures across it. We send down rain from the sky and produce every kind of noble creature in pairs.
11. This is God's creation. Show Me what others besides Him have created. Indeed, the wrongdoers are in clear error.
12. We bestowed wisdom on Luqman, saying: "Be grateful to God." Whoever is grateful does so for their own benefit, and whoever is ungrateful, God is free of all wants, worthy of all praise.
13. Luqman said to his son while advising him: "O my son, do not associate anything with God. Indeed, associating others with Him is a great injustice."
14. We have enjoined upon man to be good to his parents. His mother bore him with hardship upon hardship, and his weaning takes two years. Be grateful to Me and to your parents; to Me is the final return.
15. But if they strive to make you associate with Me what you have no knowledge of, do not obey them. Yet, bear them company in this life with justice and consideration, and follow the way of those who turn to Me. In the end, the return of you all is to Me, and I will inform you of what you did.
16. "O my son," said Luqman, "if there is anything as small as a mustard seed, hidden in a rock, in the heavens, or on the earth, God will bring it forth. God understands the finest mysteries and is well-acquainted with them."
17. "O my son, establish regular prayer, enjoin what is just, and forbid what is wrong. Bear with patience whatever befalls you. Indeed, these acts require courage."
18. "Do not turn your cheek in scorn towards people, nor walk arrogantly on the earth. God does not love any arrogant boaster."
19. "Be moderate in your pace and lower your voice. Indeed, the harshest of sounds is the braying of a donkey."
20. Do you not see that God has subjected to your use all things in the heavens and on earth and has made His bounties flow to you in exceeding measure, both seen and unseen? Yet, among people, there are those who dispute about God without knowledge, guidance, or an enlightening book.
21. When they are told to follow what God has sent down, they say: "No, we will follow what we found our fathers following." Even if it is Satan beckoning them to the penalty of the blazing fire?When they are told to follow what God has revealed, they say, "No, we will follow what we found our fathers doing." Even if the devil is leading them to the punishment of the blazing fire?

Whoever submits themselves to God and does good has indeed grasped the most trustworthy handhold. With God rests the end and decision of all matters.

If anyone rejects faith, do not let their rejection grieve you. Their return is to Us, and We will inform them of what they did. God knows well what is in people's hearts.

We grant them enjoyment for a little while, but in the end, We will drive them to a severe punishment.

If you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, "God." Say, "Praise be to God!" But most of them do not understand.

To God belong all things in the heavens and the earth. God is free of all wants, worthy of all praise.

If all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean were ink, with seven more oceans to add to it, the words of God would not be exhausted. God is Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom.

Your creation and resurrection are like that of a single soul. God is the One who hears and sees all things.

Do you not see that God merges night into day and day into night, and has subjected the sun and the moon to His law, each running its course for an appointed term? God is well-acquainted with all that you do.

This is because God is the only Reality, and whatever else they invoke besides Him is falsehood. God is the Most High, Most Great.

Do you not see that the ships sail through the ocean by the grace of God, so that He may show you His signs? Indeed, in this are signs for all who constantly persevere and give thanks.

When a wave covers them like a canopy, they call to God, offering Him sincere devotion. But when He delivers them safely to land, some of them waver. None reject Our signs except the ungrateful traitors.

O mankind, do your duty to your Lord and fear the coming of a Day when no father can help his son, nor a son help his father. The promise of God is true. Do not let this present life deceive you, nor let the chief deceiver deceive you about God.

Verily, the knowledge of the Hour is with God alone. He sends down the rain and knows what is in the wombs. No one knows what they will earn tomorrow, nor in what land they will die. God is all-knowing and aware.

**Chapter 32: As-Sajda (The Prostration, Worship, Adoration)**

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Alif. Lam. Mim.
2. This is the revelation of the Book in which there is no doubt, from the Lord of the Worlds.
3. Or do they say, "He has forged it"? No, it is the truth from your Lord, so that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, so that they may receive guidance.
4. God is the One who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, and then established Himself on the Throne. You have no protector or intercessor besides Him. Will you not then take heed?
5. He directs all affairs from the heavens to the earth, and then they ascend to Him in a day, the measure of which is a thousand years of your reckoning.He manages everything from the heavens to the earth, and it all returns to Him in a day that is like a thousand years of your reckoning. He knows everything, both hidden and visible, and He is powerful and merciful. He created everything perfectly and began the creation of man from clay. Then He made man's descendants from a simple fluid. He shaped him and breathed into him His spirit, giving him hearing, sight, and hearts, yet little thanks do people give.

They ask, "When we are lost in the earth, will we be recreated?" They deny the meeting with their Lord. Say, "The Angel of Death, who is in charge of you, will take your souls, and then you will be returned to your Lord." If only you could see when the guilty ones will bow their heads before their Lord, saying, "Our Lord, we have seen and heard. Send us back, and we will do good deeds. We now believe."

If We had willed, We could have given every soul its guidance, but My word will come true: "I will fill Hell with jinn and humans together." So taste the punishment for forgetting this Day. We will forget you. Taste the eternal penalty for your deeds. Only those who believe in Our signs, when they are recited to them, fall down in prostration and praise their Lord without pride. They forsake their beds to call on their Lord in fear and hope and spend in charity from what We have given them. No one knows what delights are kept hidden for them as a reward for their good deeds.

Is the believer like the wicked? They are not equal. Those who believe and do good deeds will have gardens as their homes, a reward for their deeds. But the rebellious and wicked will have the Fire as their abode. Whenever they try to escape, they will be forced back and told, "Taste the penalty of the Fire you used to deny." We will make them taste the lesser punishment before the greater one so that they may return.

Who does more wrong than the one who turns away from the signs of his Lord? We will exact retribution from the transgressors. We gave the Book to Moses, so do not doubt its reaching you. We made it a guide for the Children of Israel. We appointed leaders from among them who guided by Our command when they were patient and believed firmly in Our signs. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning their differences.

Does it not teach them a lesson how many generations We destroyed before them, whose dwellings they now walk through? There are signs in this. Do they not listen? Do they not see that We drive rain to parched soil and produce crops for their cattle and themselves? Have they no vision? They ask, "When will this decision be if you are telling the truth?"They ask, "When will this judgment happen if you are truthful?" Say, "On the Day of Decision, it will be too late for unbelievers to believe, and they will not be given any respite." So, turn away from them and wait, for they too are waiting.

Chapter 33: AL-AHZAB (THE CLANS, THE COALITION, THE COMBINED FORCES)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

O Prophet! Fear God and do not listen to the unbelievers and hypocrites. God is full of Knowledge and Wisdom. Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord, for God is aware of all that you do. Put your trust in God, for He is sufficient as a disposer of affairs.

God has not made for any man two hearts in his body, nor has He made your wives whom you divorce by Zihar your mothers, nor has He made your adopted sons your real sons. These are just words from your mouths. But God speaks the truth and shows the right way. Call them by their fathers' names; that is more just in the sight of God. If you do not know their fathers, then they are your brothers in faith and your friends. There is no blame on you if you make a mistake, but what counts is the intention of your hearts. God is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves, and his wives are their mothers. Blood-relations have closer personal ties in the decree of God than the Brotherhood of Believers and Muhajirs. Nevertheless, do what is just to your closest friends; this is written in the decree of God.

Remember when We took a covenant from the prophets, including you, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, son of Mary. We took from them a solemn covenant so that God may question the custodians of truth about their truthfulness. He has prepared a grievous penalty for the unbelievers.

O believers! Remember the grace of God when hosts came down upon you, and We sent against them a hurricane and forces you could not see. God sees all that you do. When they came upon you from above and below, your eyes dimmed, and your hearts reached your throats, and you imagined various thoughts about God. In that situation, the believers were tried and shaken with a tremendous shaking.

The hypocrites and those with a disease in their hearts said, "God and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion!" A party among them said, "O people of Yathrib! You cannot stand the attack, so go back!" And a band of them asked for leave of the Prophet, saying, "Our houses are exposed," though they were not. They intended nothing but to run away.

If the enemy had entered from all sides and incited them to sedition, they would have committed it with little hesitation. They had already covenanted with God not to turn their backs, and a covenant with God must be answered for. Say, "Running away will not profit you if you flee from death or slaughter; even if you escape, you will only enjoy a brief respite." Say, "Who can protect you from God if He wishes to punish or show mercy to you?"Say: "Who can protect you from God if He intends harm or mercy for you?" They will find no protector or helper besides God.

God knows those among you who hold back and those who say to their brothers, "Come to us," but they hardly join the fight.

They are stingy towards you. When fear comes, you see them looking at you with eyes rolling like someone fainting from death. But when the fear is gone, they attack you with sharp tongues, greedy for wealth. They have no faith, so God nullifies their deeds, and that is easy for God.

They think the Confederates have not withdrawn. If the Confederates come again, they would wish to be in the desert with the Bedouins, asking for news about you. If they were among you, they would fight very little.

Indeed, in the Messenger of God, you have a good example for anyone who hopes in God and the Last Day and remembers God often.

When the believers saw the Confederate forces, they said, "This is what God and His Messenger promised us, and God and His Messenger told the truth." It only increased their faith and submission.

Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with God. Some have fulfilled their vow by death, and some are still waiting. They have not changed in the least.

God will reward the truthful for their truth and punish the hypocrites if He wills, or turn to them in mercy. God is Forgiving, Merciful.

God turned back the unbelievers in their rage; they gained no advantage. God sufficed the believers in battle. God is Strong, Mighty.

He brought down those of the People of the Book who supported them from their strongholds and cast terror into their hearts. Some you killed, and some you took as prisoners.

He made you heirs of their lands, houses, and goods, and of a land you had not frequented before. God has power over all things.

O Prophet! Say to your wives: "If you desire the life of this world and its glitter, come! I will provide for your enjoyment and set you free in a handsome manner."

But if you seek God and His Messenger and the Hereafter, God has prepared a great reward for the good among you.

O wives of the Prophet! If any of you commits evident unseemly conduct, her punishment will be doubled, and that is easy for God.

But any of you who is devout in the service of God and His Messenger and works righteousness, will receive her reward twice, and We have prepared for her a generous sustenance.

O wives of the Prophet! You are not like other women. If you fear God, do not be too soft in speech, lest one in whose heart is a disease should be moved with desire. Speak justly.

Stay quietly in your houses and do not make a dazzling display like that of the former Times of Ignorance. Establish regular prayer, give regular charity, and obey God and His Messenger. God only wishes to remove all abomination from you, O Members of the Family, and to make you pure and spotless."God only desires to keep you pure and free from any impurity, O people of the House! Remember and recite the signs of God and His wisdom that are shared in your homes. God understands the finest mysteries and is well-acquainted with them.

For Muslim men and women, for believing men and women, for devout men and women, for truthful men and women, for patient and constant men and women, for humble men and women, for those who give in charity, for those who fast, for those who guard their chastity, and for those who engage much in God's praise—God has prepared forgiveness and a great reward.

It is not fitting for a believing man or woman, when God and His Messenger have decided a matter, to have any option about their decision. Anyone who disobeys God and His Messenger is on a clearly wrong path.

You said to the one who had received God's grace and your favor, 'Keep your wife and fear God.' But you hid in your heart what God was about to make manifest; you feared the people, but it is more fitting that you should fear God. When Zaid had dissolved his marriage with her, We joined her in marriage to you so that there may be no difficulty for believers in marrying the wives of their adopted sons after they have dissolved their marriages. God's command must be fulfilled.

There is no difficulty for the Prophet in what God has indicated to him as a duty. This was the practice approved by God among those who have passed away. God's command is a decree determined.

Those who preach the messages of God and fear Him, and fear none but God, are sufficient to call men to account. Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the Messenger of God and the Seal of the Prophets. God has full knowledge of all things.

O believers! Remember God often and glorify Him morning and evening. He sends blessings on you, as do His angels, to bring you out from the depths of darkness into light. He is full of mercy to the believers. Their greeting on the Day they meet Him will be 'Peace!' and He has prepared for them a generous reward.

O Prophet! We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of glad tidings, and a warner, and as one who invites to God's grace by His leave, and as a lamp spreading light. Give the glad tidings to the believers that they shall have a great bounty from God.

Do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and disregard their annoyances. Put your trust in God, for He is sufficient as a Disposer of affairs.

O believers! When you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them, there is no waiting period for them. Give them a present and set them free in a handsome manner.

O Prophet! We have made lawful to you your wives to whom you have paid their dowers, and those whom your right hand possesses out of the prisoners of war whom God has assigned to you, and the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts who migrated with you, and any believing woman who dedicates her soul to the Prophet if he wishes to wed her. This is only for you and not for the believers at large. We know what We have ordained for them."O Prophet! We have made lawful for you your wives to whom you have given their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses from the captives of war that God has given you, and the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts who migrated with you. Also, any believing woman who offers herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet wishes to marry her—this is a privilege for you only, not for the rest of the believers. We know what We have ordained for them regarding their wives and those whom their right hands possess, so there should be no difficulty for you. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

You may defer the turn of any of them that you please, and you may receive any you please. There is no blame on you if you invite one whose turn you had set aside. This is better for their comfort, to prevent their grief, and to ensure their satisfaction with what you give them. God knows what is in your hearts, and God is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.

It is not lawful for you to marry more women after this, nor to change them for other wives, even if their beauty attracts you, except those whom your right hand possesses. God is Watchful over all things.

O believers! Do not enter the Prophet's houses unless permission is given to you for a meal, and do not wait for its preparation. When you are invited, enter, and when you have taken your meal, disperse without lingering for conversation. Such behavior annoys the Prophet, but he is too shy to ask you to leave. God is not shy of the truth. When you ask his wives for anything, ask them from behind a screen. This is purer for your hearts and their hearts. It is not right for you to annoy God's Messenger or to marry his widows after him. Truly, this is a grave offense in God's sight.

Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, God has full knowledge of all things.

There is no blame on the Prophet's wives if they appear before their fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers' sons, their sisters' sons, their women, or their slaves. O women, fear God, for God is Witness to all things.

God and His angels send blessings on the Prophet. O believers, send blessings on him and salute him with all respect.

Those who annoy God and His Messenger are cursed by God in this world and the Hereafter, and a humiliating punishment is prepared for them.

Those who annoy believing men and women undeservedly bear the guilt of slander and manifest sin.

O Prophet! Tell your wives, daughters, and the believing women to cast their outer garments over themselves when they go out. This is more appropriate so that they may be recognized and not molested. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

If the hypocrites, those with a disease in their hearts, and those who stir up sedition in the city do not desist, We shall certainly stir you up against them. Then they will not be able to stay in it as your neighbors for any length of time. They shall be cursed, seized wherever found, and slain without mercy.This has always been God's way with those who came before, and you will not find any change in God's way.

People ask you about the Hour. Say, "Only God knows about it." How can you understand? The Hour might be near!

God has cursed the disbelievers and prepared a blazing fire for them, where they will stay forever without any protector or helper. On the Day their faces are turned upside down in the Fire, they will say, "Oh, we wish we had obeyed God and His Messenger!" They will also say, "Our Lord, we followed our leaders and they led us astray. Our Lord, give them double the punishment and curse them greatly."

Believers, do not be like those who insulted Moses. God cleared him of their false accusations, and he was honorable in God's sight. Believers, fear God and always speak the truth. He will make your conduct right and forgive your sins. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger has achieved the highest success.

We offered the Trust to the heavens, the earth, and the mountains, but they refused to bear it and were afraid. However, man undertook it, and he was indeed unjust and foolish. As a result, God will punish hypocritical men and women and disbelieving men and women, but He will turn in mercy to believing men and women. God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Chapter 34: SABA (SABA, SHEBA)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Praise be to God, to whom belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. Praise Him in the Hereafter too. He is Wise and Aware. He knows everything that goes into the earth and comes out of it, everything that descends from the sky and ascends to it. He is the Most Merciful, the Oft-Forgiving.

The disbelievers say, "The Hour will never come to us." Say, "By my Lord, it will surely come to you. He knows the unseen, and not even an atom's weight escapes Him in the heavens or on earth. Everything is in a clear record." This is so He may reward those who believe and do good deeds. For them, there is forgiveness and a generous provision. But those who strive against Our signs to frustrate them will face a humiliating punishment.

Those who have been given knowledge see that what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth and guides to the path of the Mighty, the Praised. The disbelievers say mockingly, "Shall we show you a man who claims that when you are scattered into pieces, you will be raised in a new creation?" They say, "Has he invented a lie against God, or is he possessed?" No, it is those who do not believe in the Hereafter who are in torment and far error.

Do they not see what is before them and behind them in the sky and the earth? If We wished, We could cause the earth to swallow them or make a piece of the sky fall upon them. Surely, in this is a sign for every servant who turns to God in repentance."land or bring down a portion from the sky; surely there is a sign in this for every servant who turns to God."

We granted David a special favor from Us: "O mountains, echo God's praises with him, and you birds too!" We made iron soft for him, saying, "Make coats of mail, balancing the rings well, and do good deeds. I see everything you do."

To Solomon, We made the wind obedient: its morning journey was a month's travel, and its evening journey was a month's travel. We made a fountain of molten brass flow for him, and some jinn worked under his command by his Lord's permission. If any of them disobeyed, We made them taste the penalty of the blazing fire.

They made for him whatever he desired: arches, images, basins as large as reservoirs, and fixed cauldrons. "Work, O family of David, with gratitude!" But few of My servants are truly grateful.

When We decreed Solomon's death, nothing indicated his death to them except a little worm of the earth, which kept gnawing away at his staff. When he fell, the jinn realized that if they had known the unseen, they would not have remained in humiliating toil.

There was a sign for Sheba in their homeland: two gardens on the right and the left. "Eat from your Lord's provision and be grateful to Him: a good land and a forgiving Lord." But they turned away, so We sent against them the flood from the dams, and We converted their two gardens into gardens producing bitter fruit, tamarisks, and a few stunted lote-trees.

This was their recompense for their ingratitude. We do not punish anyone except the ungrateful. Between them and the cities We had blessed, We placed prominent cities and appointed stages of journey in due proportion: "Travel safely by night and day." But they said, "Our Lord, make the distances between our journey-stages longer," and they wronged themselves. So We made them as a tale and scattered them in fragments. Surely, in this are signs for every patient and grateful person.

Satan proved his idea true about them, and they followed him, except for a group of true believers. He had no authority over them, except that We might test who believes in the Hereafter from who is in doubt about it. Your Lord watches over all things.

Say, "Call upon those you claim besides God. They do not possess even an atom's weight in the heavens or on earth, nor do they have any share in either, nor is any of them a helper to God." No intercession will be of any use with Him except for those He permits. When fear is removed from their hearts, they will say, "What did your Lord say?" They will say, "The truth." He is the Most High, the Great.

Say, "Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?" Say, "God. Surely, either we or you are on right guidance or in manifest error." Say, "You will not be questioned about our sins, nor will we be questioned about what you do." Say, "Our Lord will gather us together and will decide the matter between us in truth and justice.""He is the one to decide, the One Who knows all." 

Say: "Our Lord will bring us all together, then He will judge between us with truth. He is the All-knowing Judge."

Say: "Show me those whom you have joined with Him as partners. You cannot do it! He is God, the Mighty, the Wise."

We have sent you, Muhammad, as a universal Messenger to all people, bringing good news and warning them, but most people do not understand.

They ask, "When will this promise come to pass if you are telling the truth?"

Say: "The appointment is for a Day you cannot delay or advance by even an hour."

The disbelievers say, "We will not believe in this scripture or any that came before it." If only you could see when the wrongdoers are made to stand before their Lord, blaming each other! Those who were oppressed will say to the arrogant ones, "If it weren't for you, we would have been believers!"

The arrogant ones will respond, "Did we stop you from guidance after it reached you? No, you were the ones who transgressed."

The oppressed will say, "No, it was your scheming day and night, telling us to disbelieve in God and set up equals to Him." They will be filled with regret when they see the punishment, and We will put shackles on the necks of the disbelievers. They will only be repaid for what they did.

Whenever We sent a warner to a population, the wealthy ones among them said, "We do not believe in the message you have been sent with."

They said, "We have more wealth and children, and we will not be punished."

Say: "My Lord enlarges and restricts provision for whom He pleases, but most people do not understand."

It is not your wealth or your children that bring you closer to Us, but those who believe and do good deeds. They will have a multiplied reward and will reside securely in high places.

Those who strive against Our signs to frustrate them will be given over to punishment.

Say: "My Lord enlarges and restricts sustenance for whom He pleases. Whatever you spend in His cause, He replaces it. He is the Best of Providers."

One day, He will gather them all together and say to the angels, "Was it you that these people used to worship?"

They will say, "Glory to You! You are our Protector, not them. They worshipped the jinn; most of them believed in them."

On that day, they will have no power over each other for profit or harm. We will say to the wrongdoers, "Taste the penalty of the Fire, which you used to deny."

When Our clear signs are recited to them, they say, "This is just a man who wants to turn you away from what your fathers worshipped." They say, "This is a lie invented!" The disbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them, "This is nothing but evident magic!"

We did not give them any books to study, nor did We send messengers to them before you as warners.

Their predecessors also rejected the truth; these people have not received even a tenth of what We granted to those before them. Yet when they rejected My messengers, how terrible was My rejection of them!Those before them also rejected the truth, and these people haven't even received a tenth of what was given to their predecessors. Yet, they still denied My messengers. How severe was My disapproval of them!

Say: "I advise you on one thing: Stand up for God, whether in pairs or alone, and reflect. Your companion is not possessed; he is only a warner to you of a severe punishment."

Say: "I do not ask for any reward from you; my reward is only from God. He is a witness over all things."

Say: "My Lord reveals the truth. He knows everything hidden."

Say: "The truth has come, and falsehood neither creates anything new nor restores anything."

Say: "If I am wrong, I only harm myself. But if I am guided, it is because of what my Lord reveals to me. He hears all things and is always near."

If you could see when they are terrified with no escape and are seized from a close position, they will say, "We now believe in the truth." But how can they attain faith from such a distant place?

They disbelieved before and cast slanders on the unseen from afar. A barrier will be placed between them and their desires, just as it was done with their predecessors. They were indeed in suspicious doubt.

Chapter 35: FATIR (THE ANGELS, ORIGINATOR)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Praise be to God, who created the heavens and the earth and made the angels messengers with wings—two, three, or four pairs. He adds to creation as He pleases, for God has power over all things.

Whatever mercy God bestows on mankind, no one can withhold it. And whatever He withholds, no one can grant it apart from Him. He is the Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom.

O people! Remember God's grace upon you. Is there any creator other than God who provides for you from the sky and the earth? There is no god but Him. How then are you deluded away from the truth?

If they reject you, messengers before you were also rejected. All affairs return to God for decision.

O people! The promise of God is true. Do not let this present life deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you about God.

Satan is an enemy to you, so treat him as an enemy. He only invites his followers to become companions of the Blazing Fire.

For those who reject God, there is a terrible penalty. But for those who believe and do righteous deeds, there is forgiveness and a magnificent reward.

Is the one whose evil deeds are made to seem attractive to him, so he considers them good, equal to one who is rightly guided? God leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. Do not let your soul waste away in grief for them. God knows well all that they do.

It is God who sends forth the winds, raising the clouds. We drive them to a dead land and revive the earth after its death. This is how the Resurrection will be.

If anyone seeks glory and power, know that all glory and power belong to God. Pure words ascend to Him, and He exalts righteous deeds. Those who plot evil will face a terrible penalty, and their plotting will come to nothing.

God created you from dust, then from a sperm-drop, then He...God created you from dust, then from a tiny drop of fluid, and then made you into pairs (male and female). No woman becomes pregnant or gives birth without His knowledge. No one lives a long life or has their life shortened without it being recorded in a decree. This is easy for God.

The two bodies of water are not alike: one is fresh, sweet, and good to drink, while the other is salty and bitter. Yet, from both, you eat fresh meat and extract ornaments to wear. You see ships sailing through them so you may seek God's bounty and be grateful.

God merges night into day and day into night. He has subjected the sun and the moon, each running its course for an appointed term. This is God, your Lord; to Him belongs all dominion. Those you call upon besides Him have no power.

If you call upon them, they will not hear you, and even if they could hear, they cannot answer you. On the Day of Judgment, they will reject your partnership. None can inform you like the One who is aware of all things.

O people! You are in need of God, but God is free of all wants and worthy of all praise. If He wills, He can remove you and bring a new creation. This is not difficult for God.

No soul burdened with sin can bear the burden of another. If a heavily laden soul calls for help, none of its burden will be carried, even by a close relative. You can only warn those who fear their Lord in secret and establish regular prayer. Whoever purifies themselves does so for their own benefit. The final destination is to God.

The blind and the seeing are not alike, nor are darkness and light, nor are the cool shade and the scorching heat. The living and the dead are not alike. God makes whom He wills to hear, but you cannot make those in the graves hear.

You are only a warner. We have sent you with the truth, as a bearer of good news and a warner. There has never been a people without a warner among them. If they reject you, so did those before them. Their messengers came with clear signs, scriptures, and the enlightening book.

In the end, I punished those who rejected faith, and how terrible was My rejection of them!

Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky, and with it, We bring forth produce of various colors? In the mountains, there are tracts of white, red, and intense black. Among people, animals, and cattle, there are also various colors. Only those who have knowledge truly fear God. God is mighty and forgiving.

Those who recite the Book of God, establish regular prayer, and spend in charity secretly and openly hope for a reward that will never fail. God will pay them their due and give them even more out of His bounty. He is forgiving and appreciative.

What We have revealed to you of the Book is the truth, confirming what was revealed before it. God is well-acquainted and fully observant of His servants.What we have revealed to you from the Book is the truth, confirming what was revealed before it. God is fully aware and observant of His servants.

We have given the Book as an inheritance to those of Our servants whom We have chosen. Among them, some wrong their own souls, some follow a middle course, and some, by God's permission, are foremost in good deeds. This is the highest grace.

They will enter Gardens of Eternity, adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments will be of silk. They will say, "Praise be to God, who has removed all sorrow from us. Our Lord is indeed forgiving and appreciative."

God, out of His bounty, has settled us in a home that will last forever, where no toil or weariness will touch us.

But those who reject God will face the Fire of Hell. They will neither die nor will its penalty be lightened for them. This is how We reward the ungrateful.

In Hell, they will cry out, "Our Lord! Bring us out; we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But it will be said to them, "Did We not give you a long enough life for anyone who would reflect to do so? And a warner came to you. So taste the consequences of your deeds, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God knows all the hidden things of the heavens and the earth. He is fully aware of what is in people's hearts.

He has made you inheritors on the earth. If anyone rejects God, their rejection works against themselves. Their disbelief only increases their loss and the odium in the sight of their Lord.

Say, "Have you seen these 'partners' you call upon besides God? Show me what they have created on the earth, or do they have a share in the heavens? Or have We given them a Book from which they derive clear evidence? No, the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusions."

God sustains the heavens and the earth, lest they cease to function. If they were to fail, no one could sustain them after Him. He is Most Forbearing, Oft-Forgiving.

They swore their strongest oaths by God that if a warner came to them, they would follow his guidance better than any other people. But when a warner came to them, it only increased their aversion.

This was due to their arrogance in the land and their plotting of evil. But the plotting of evil will only trap its authors. Are they waiting for anything except the way the ancients were dealt with? You will not find any change in God's way of dealing, nor will you find any turning off in God's way of dealing.

Have they not traveled through the earth and seen the end of those before them, who were superior in strength? God is not to be frustrated by anything in the heavens or on earth. He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.

If God were to punish people according to what they deserve, He would not leave a single living creature on the earth. But He gives them respite for a stated term. When their term expires, God is fully aware of His servants.In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Ya Seen. By the wise Qur'an, you are indeed one of the messengers, on a straight path. This is a revelation from the Mighty, the Merciful, so that you may warn a people whose ancestors were not warned, and thus they are heedless. The word has already proven true against most of them, for they do not believe. We have placed yokes around their necks up to their chins, so their heads are forced up. We have put a barrier in front of them and a barrier behind them, and covered them so they cannot see. It is the same whether you warn them or not; they will not believe.

You can only warn those who follow the message and fear the Most Gracious in secret. Give them good news of forgiveness and a generous reward. We will surely bring the dead to life and record what they have sent ahead and what they have left behind. Everything is recorded in a clear book.

Tell them the story of the people of the city when messengers came to them. We sent two messengers, but they rejected them. So, We reinforced them with a third, and they said, "We have been sent to you." The people replied, "You are just humans like us. The Most Gracious has not revealed anything; you are lying." The messengers said, "Our Lord knows that we have been sent to you, and our duty is only to deliver the clear message."

The people said, "We see an evil omen in you. If you do not stop, we will stone you, and a painful punishment will befall you." The messengers replied, "Your evil omen is with yourselves. Is it because you are reminded of the truth? No, you are a transgressing people."

Then a man came running from the farthest part of the city, saying, "O my people, follow the messengers. Follow those who do not ask for any reward and are rightly guided. Why should I not worship the One who created me and to whom you will be returned? Should I take other gods besides Him? If the Most Gracious intends harm for me, their intercession will not help me, nor can they save me. I would then be in clear error. I believe in your Lord, so listen to me."

It was said to him, "Enter Paradise." He said, "If only my people knew how my Lord has forgiven me and made me one of the honored ones." We did not send any hosts from heaven against his people after him, nor do We ever send such. It was just one mighty blast, and they were extinguished.

Alas for the servants! No messenger comes to them but they mock him. Do they not see how many generations We destroyed before them? They will not return to them, but all of them will be brought before Us.

A sign for them is the dead earth. We give it life and produce grain from it, which they eat. We have placed gardens of date-palms and vines, and caused springs to gush forth therein.We create gardens of date palms and grapevines and make springs of water flow within them. This is so people can enjoy the fruits, which they did not create with their own hands. Will they not then be grateful?

Glory to God, who created all things in pairs, including what the earth produces, their own kind, and things they do not know.

A sign for them is the night; We strip the day from it, and they are left in darkness. The sun runs its course for a determined period; this is the decree of the Mighty, the All-Knowing. The moon has phases until it returns like an old, withered date stalk. The sun cannot overtake the moon, nor can the night outstrip the day. Each floats in its own orbit.

A sign for them is that We carried their ancestors in the loaded Ark. We created similar vessels for them to ride. If We willed, We could drown them, and there would be no one to help or save them, except by Our mercy and for their temporary enjoyment.

When they are told, "Fear what is before you and what is behind you, so you may receive mercy," they turn away. No sign comes to them from their Lord, but they turn away from it. When they are told, "Spend from what God has provided you," the disbelievers say to the believers, "Shall we feed those whom God could have fed if He willed? You are in clear error."

They ask, "When will this promise come to pass if you are truthful?" They await but a single blast, which will seize them while they are disputing. They will not be able to make a will or return to their families.

The trumpet will be blown, and they will rush forth from their graves to their Lord. They will say, "Woe to us! Who has raised us from our resting place?" This is what the Most Gracious had promised, and the messengers spoke the truth. It will be but a single blast, and they will all be brought before Us.

On that day, no soul will be wronged, and you will only be repaid for what you used to do. The companions of the Garden will be joyfully occupied. They and their spouses will be in pleasant shade, reclining on thrones. They will have fruits and whatever they desire. "Peace!" - a word from a Merciful Lord.

But to the guilty, it will be said, "Get apart this day! Did I not enjoin on you, O children of Adam, that you should not worship Satan, for he is your open enemy, and that you should worship Me? This is the straight path. Yet he led astray a great multitude of you. Did you not understand? This is the Hell you were warned about. Enter it today because you disbelieved."

On that day, We will seal their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will bear witness to what they used to do. If We willed, We could have blotted out their eyes, and they would struggle to find the way. How could they see?If it had been Our will, We could have immobilized them in their places, making them unable to move forward or turn back. If We grant someone a long life, We reverse their development, making them weak after being strong. Do they not understand?

We did not teach the Prophet poetry, nor is it fitting for him. This is a clear message and a Qur'an to warn those who are alive and to confirm the truth against the disbelievers. Do they not see that We created cattle for them, which they own and use for riding and food? They also get other benefits and drinks from them. Will they not be grateful?

Yet, they worship other gods besides God, hoping for help. These gods cannot help them; instead, they will be brought before Us for judgment. Do not let their words grieve you, Muhammad. We know what they hide and what they reveal.

Doesn't man see that We created him from a drop of seed, yet he becomes an open adversary? He forgets his own creation and asks, "Who can give life to these decomposed bones?" Say, "He who created them the first time will give them life again. He is knowledgeable about every creation."

He who produces fire from green trees for you, is He not able to create the like of them? Yes, indeed! He is the Creator Supreme, with infinite skill and knowledge. When He intends a thing, He simply says, "Be," and it is.

So, glory to Him in whose hands is the dominion of all things, and to Him, you will all be brought back.

Chapter 37: AS-SAAFFAT (THOSE WHO SET THE RANKS, DRAWN UP IN RANKS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

By those who range themselves in ranks, and those who drive away evil, and those who recite the message, your God is one. He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and the Lord of every point at the rising of the sun.

We have adorned the lowest heaven with stars for beauty and as a guard against rebellious evil spirits. They cannot listen to the exalted assembly and are pelted from every side, outcast, and under perpetual torment. Except for those who snatch something by stealth, they are pursued by a flaming fire.

Ask them, "Are they more difficult to create, or the other beings We have created?" We created them from sticky clay. You marvel while they ridicule, and when they are admonished, they pay no heed. When they see a sign, they mock and say, "This is nothing but evident sorcery!"

They ask, "What! When we die and become dust and bones, shall we be raised up again, along with our forefathers?" Say, "Yes, and you will be humiliated." It will be a single compelling cry, and they will begin to see. They will say, "Ah! Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment!""This is the Day of Judgment, the day you denied!" A voice will declare, "This is the Day of Sorting Out, which you used to deny." It will be said, "Bring forth the wrongdoers and their spouses, and everything they worshipped besides God, and lead them to the path of Hell. But stop them, for they must be questioned: 'What is wrong with you that you do not help each other?'" On that day, they will submit to judgment and turn to one another, questioning each other. They will say, "You used to come to us with authority!" But the others will reply, "No, you were not believers. We had no power over you; you were a rebellious people. Now the word of our Lord has come true against us; we will taste the punishment. We led you astray because we were astray ourselves." On that day, they will all share in the penalty. This is how We deal with the guilty. When they were told, "There is no god but God," they were arrogant and said, "Should we abandon our gods for a mad poet?" But he brought the truth and confirmed the previous messengers. Now you will taste the painful punishment, a retribution for what you did. But the sincere servants of God will have a known provision: fruits and honor in the Gardens of Delight, facing each other on thrones. They will be served a cup from a clear-flowing fountain, crystal-white and delicious to drink, free from headiness and intoxication. With them will be chaste women with beautiful eyes, as if they were delicate eggs closely guarded. They will turn to one another and question each other. One will say, "I had a close companion who used to say, 'Do you really believe in the truth? When we die and become dust and bones, will we really be judged?'" He will look down and see his companion in the midst of the Fire and say, "By God, you almost ruined me! If it were not for the grace of my Lord, I would have been among those brought to doom." They will say, "Are we not to die except for our first death, and we will not be punished?" This is the supreme achievement. For this, let all strive who wish to strive. Is this better as an entertainment or the tree of Zaqqum? We have made it a trial for the wrongdoers. It is a tree that springs from the bottom of Hell, with fruit like the heads of devils. They will eat from it and fill their bellies, then drink boiling water. Their return will be to the Blazing Fire. They found their fathers on the wrong path, and they rushed to follow in their footsteps. Many of the ancients went astray before them.Most of the people from ancient times went astray before them. We sent messengers to warn them, but they didn't listen. Look at what happened to those who ignored the warnings. Only the sincere servants of God were saved. 

Noah called out to Us, and We heard his prayer. We saved him and his people from the great calamity and made his descendants the survivors. We left a blessing for him among future generations: "Peace be upon Noah among the nations!" This is how We reward those who do right, for he was one of Our believing servants. The rest were overwhelmed by the Flood.

Among those who followed Noah's way was Abraham. He approached his Lord with a pure heart and questioned his father and people about their worship of false gods. He challenged their beliefs and turned away from their idols. When they tried to harm him, We saved him and made them the ones humiliated. Abraham said, "I will go to my Lord; He will guide me." He prayed for a righteous son, and We gave him the good news of a patient and forbearing boy.

When the boy was old enough to work with him, Abraham told him about his vision to sacrifice him. The son agreed, showing patience and faith. As they submitted to God's will, We called out to Abraham, telling him he had fulfilled the vision. We ransomed the boy with a great sacrifice and left a blessing for Abraham among future generations: "Peace be upon Abraham!" This is how We reward those who do right, for he was one of Our believing servants.

We also gave Abraham the good news of Isaac, a prophet among the righteous. We blessed both Abraham and Isaac, and among their descendants, some do right while others wrong themselves.

We bestowed Our favor on Moses and Aaron, delivering them and their people from great distress. We helped them overcome their troubles and gave them the clear Scripture, guiding them to the right path. We left a blessing for them among future generations: "Peace be upon Moses and Aaron!" This is how We reward those who do right, for they were two of Our believing servants.Elias was also one of the messengers sent by Us. He asked his people, "Will you not fear God? Will you call upon Baal and forsake the Best of Creators, God, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?" But they rejected him, and they will certainly face punishment, except for the sincere servants of God. We left a blessing for him among future generations: "Peace be upon Elias!" This is how We reward those who do right, for he was one of Our believing servants.

Lot was also one of the messengers. We saved him and his followers, except for an old woman who lagged behind. Then We destroyed the rest. You pass by their ruins by day and by night; will you not understand?

Jonah was also one of the messengers. When he ran away to a fully laden ship, he drew lots and was thrown overboard. The big fish swallowed him, and he had done acts worthy of blame. Had he not repented and glorified God, he would have remained inside the fish until the Day of Resurrection. But We cast him forth on the shore while he was sick, and caused a gourd plant to grow over him. We sent him to a hundred thousand or more, and they believed, so We allowed them to enjoy their life for a while.

Ask them: Does your Lord have daughters while they have sons? Did We create the angels as females while they were witnesses? They lie when they say, "God has begotten children." They are liars! Did He choose daughters over sons? What is the matter with you? How do you judge? Will you not then receive admonition? Do you have clear authority? Then bring your book if you are truthful. They have invented a relationship between God and the jinn, but the jinn know they will be brought before Him. Glory to God! He is free from what they ascribe to Him. Not so the sincere servants of God.

Neither you nor those you worship can lead anyone into temptation concerning God, except those who are destined for the blazing Fire. Those ranged in ranks say, "Not one of us but has a place appointed; we are ranged in ranks for service, and we declare God's glory!"

They used to say, "If only we had a message from those of old, we would certainly have been sincere servants of God." But now that the Qur'an has come, they reject it. Soon they will know! Our word has already been passed to our servants sent by Us, that they would certainly be assisted and that Our forces must conquer. So turn away from them for a little while and watch them; they will soon see. Do they wish to hurry on our punishment? When it descends upon them, it will be a terrible morning for those who were warned but did not heed. So turn away from them for a little while."Turn away from them for a while and watch; they will soon see. Glory to your Lord, the Lord of Honor and Power! He is free from what they ascribe to Him. Peace be upon the messengers! Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.

Chapter 38: Sad (The Letter Sad)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Sad. By the Qur'an, full of admonition. But the unbelievers are steeped in self-glory and separatism. How many generations before them did We destroy? They cried for mercy when it was too late to be saved. They wonder that a warner has come to them from among themselves, and the unbelievers say, 'This is a sorcerer telling lies!' They say, 'Has he made the gods into one God? This is a strange thing!' The leaders among them go away impatiently, saying, 'Remain constant to your gods! This is a plot against you!' They say, 'We never heard of this in the former faith; this is nothing but a made-up tale!'

They question why the message was sent to him among all people. They doubt My message and have not yet tasted My punishment. Do they have the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the Exalted in Power, the Grantor of Bounties without measure? Or do they have dominion over the heavens and the earth and all between? If so, let them ascend by ropes! But they will be put to flight, even a host of confederates.

Before them, many rejected messengers: the people of Noah, 'Ad, and Pharaoh, the Lord of Stakes, and Thamud, the people of Lot, and the Companions of the Wood. All of them denied the messengers, and My punishment was justified. They only wait for a single mighty blast, which will brook no delay. They say, 'Our Lord! Hasten to us our sentence before the Day of Account!'

Have patience with what they say, and remember Our servant David, the man of strength, who always turned to God. We made the hills declare Our praises with him at eventide and at break of day, and the birds gathered in assemblies, all turning to God. We strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and sound judgment in speech and decision.

Has the story of the disputants reached you? They climbed over the wall of the private chamber. When they entered David's presence, he was terrified of them. They said, 'Fear not: we are two disputants, one of whom has wronged the other. Decide between us with truth and guide us to the even path.' One said, 'This man is my brother; he has ninety-nine ewes, and I have but one. Yet he says, "Commit her to my care," and is harsh to me in speech.' David said, 'He has undoubtedly wronged you in demanding your single ewe to be added to his flock. Many partners wrong each other, except those who believe and do good deeds, and they are few.' David realized that We had tested him, so he asked for forgiveness, fell down in prostration, and repented.

So We forgave him this lapse. He enjoyed a near approach to Us and a beautiful place of return. O David, We made you a vicegerent on earth.""O David, We have appointed you as a ruler on earth. Judge people fairly and do not follow your desires, as they will lead you away from God's path. Those who stray from God's path will face severe punishment because they forget the Day of Judgment.

We did not create the heavens, the earth, and everything in between without purpose. This is the belief of the disbelievers. Woe to those who disbelieve, for they will face the Fire of Hell.

Should We treat those who believe and do good deeds the same as those who cause corruption on earth? Should We treat the righteous the same as the wicked? This is a blessed Book We have revealed to you so that people may reflect on its verses and those with understanding may take heed.

We gave David a son, Solomon, who was an excellent servant and always turned to Us. One evening, swift horses were brought before him, and he said, 'I love these good things for the glory of my Lord,' until they disappeared from sight. He then said, 'Bring them back to me,' and he began to stroke their legs and necks.

We tested Solomon by placing a lifeless body on his throne, and he repented. He prayed, 'My Lord, forgive me and grant me a kingdom that will not be inherited by anyone after me. You are the Bestower.' So, We made the wind subservient to him, flowing gently wherever he wished. We also subjected the evil ones, including every kind of builder and diver, and others bound together in chains.

We said, 'This is Our gift, so give freely or withhold without reckoning.' Solomon enjoyed a close relationship with Us and a beautiful place of return.

Remember Our servant Job, who cried to his Lord, 'The Evil One has afflicted me with distress and suffering!' We told him, 'Strike the ground with your foot; here is a cool bath and a refreshing drink.' We restored his family to him and doubled their number as a mercy from Us and a reminder for those with understanding.

We said to him, 'Take a handful of grass and strike with it, and do not break your oath.' We found him patient and steadfast, an excellent servant who always turned to Us.

Remember Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who possessed power and vision. We chose them for a special purpose: proclaiming the message of the Hereafter. They were truly among the elect and the good in Our sight.

Remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Zul-Kifl; they were all among the chosen. This is a message of admonition, and for the righteous, there is a beautiful place of return: Gardens of Eternity, whose doors will always be open to them. There, they will recline at ease, call for abundant fruit and delicious drink, and be accompanied by chaste women of equal age.

This is the promise made to you for the Day of Account. Truly, this is Our provision, which will never fail. But for the wrongdoers, there will be an evil place of return."Indeed, Hell is a terrible place for the arrogant. They will burn there, an awful bed to lie on. They will taste boiling and freezing fluids, and other similar punishments. When a group rushes in, those already there will say, "No welcome for them! They will burn in the Fire!" The newcomers will respond, "No welcome for you either! You brought this upon us. What a terrible place to stay!" They will ask God to double the punishment for those who led them astray.

They will wonder why they don't see the people they used to mock. They will question if they underestimated them or if their eyes missed them. This is the reality of the arguments among the people of the Fire.

Say, "I am only a warner. There is no god but God, the Supreme and Irresistible, the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, the Mighty and Forgiving." This is a significant message, yet you turn away from it. I had no knowledge of the highest chiefs when they disputed. It has only been revealed to me that I am to give a clear warning.

When your Lord said to the angels, "I am about to create a human from clay. When I have fashioned him and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down in prostration to him," all the angels prostrated except Iblis. He was arrogant and became a disbeliever. God asked, "What prevented you from prostrating to what I created with My hands? Are you too proud or one of the exalted?" Iblis replied, "I am better than him. You created me from fire and him from clay." God said, "Then get out from here, for you are rejected and cursed until the Day of Judgment."

Iblis asked for respite until the Day of Resurrection, and God granted it. Iblis vowed to mislead all except God's sincere servants. God declared, "The truth is, I will fill Hell with you and those who follow you."

Say, "I ask no reward for this message, nor am I a pretender. This is a reminder for all the worlds, and you will come to know its truth in time."

Chapter 39: AZ-ZUMAR (THE TROOPS, THRONGS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

The revelation of this Book is from God, the Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom. We have revealed the Book to you in truth, so worship God with sincere devotion. Is it not to God that sincere devotion is due? But those who take protectors other than God say, "We only serve them to bring us closer to God." God will judge between them in their disputes. God does not guide those who are false and ungrateful.

If God had wished to take a son, He could have chosen anyone He pleased from His creation.If God had wanted to take a son, He could have chosen anyone from His creation. But He is above such things. He is God, the One, the Irresistible. He created the heavens and the earth with truth. He makes the night overlap the day and the day overlap the night. He has subjected the sun and the moon to His law, each running its course for an appointed time. Is He not the Exalted in Power, the One who forgives again and again?

He created you all from a single person, then created his mate of similar nature. He sent down for you eight types of cattle in pairs. He forms you in the wombs of your mothers, stage by stage, in three layers of darkness. This is God, your Lord and Cherisher. To Him belongs all dominion. There is no god but Him. How can you turn away from the truth?

If you reject God, He has no need of you, but He dislikes ingratitude from His servants. If you are grateful, He is pleased with you. No one can bear the burden of another. In the end, you will return to your Lord, and He will tell you the truth of all that you did. He knows well what is in the hearts of men.

When trouble touches a person, they cry out to their Lord, turning to Him in repentance. But when He bestows a favor upon them, they forget what they cried and prayed for before and set up rivals to God, misleading others from His path. Say, "Enjoy your blasphemy for a little while; you are one of the companions of the Fire!"

Is the one who worships devoutly during the night, prostrating and standing, who takes heed of the Hereafter and places his hope in the mercy of his Lord, equal to one who does not? Say, "Are those who know equal to those who do not know?" Only those with understanding will take heed.

Say, "O my servants who believe! Fear your Lord. Good is the reward for those who do good in this world. God's earth is spacious. Those who patiently persevere will receive a reward without measure."

Say, "I am commanded to serve God with sincere devotion and to be the first to bow to Him in Islam." Say, "If I disobey my Lord, I fear the penalty of a mighty day." Say, "It is God I serve with sincere and exclusive devotion."

Serve what you will besides Him. Say, "Those who lose their own souls and their people on the Day of Judgment are truly the losers. That is the evident loss!" They will have layers of fire above and below them. With this, God warns His servants: "O My servants, fear Me!"

Those who avoid evil and turn to God in repentance will have good news. So announce the good news to My servants who listen to the Word and follow the best meaning in it. These are the ones whom God has guided, and they are the ones endowed with understanding.

Is the one against whom the decree of punishment is justly due equal to one who avoids evil? Can you save someone who is in the Fire? But for those who fear their Lord, there are lofty mansions, one above another, with rivers flowing beneath them. This is the promise of God, and He never fails in His promise."Don't you see that God sends down rain from the sky, which then flows into the earth to form springs? With it, He produces crops of various colors. Then they wither, turn yellow, and eventually crumble away. This is a reminder for those who understand.

Is someone whose heart God has opened to Islam, receiving enlightenment from Him, the same as someone with a hardened heart? Woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembering God; they are clearly in error.

God has revealed the most beautiful message in the form of a consistent Book, repeating its teachings in various ways. The skins of those who fear their Lord tremble at it, then their skins and hearts soften to God's praise. This is God's guidance, and He guides whom He wills. But those whom God leaves to stray, no one can guide.

Is someone who fears the punishment on the Day of Judgment, and faces it, the same as someone who is protected from it? It will be said to the wrongdoers, 'Taste what you earned!'

Those before them also rejected the revelation, and the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive. God made them taste humiliation in this life, but the punishment of the Hereafter is even greater if they only knew.

We have presented every kind of parable in this Qur'an so that people may receive admonition. It is a Qur'an in Arabic, without any crookedness, so that they may guard against evil.

God gives an example: a man belonging to many partners who are at odds with each other, and a man belonging entirely to one master. Are the two equal? Praise be to God! But most people do not know.

You will die, and they will die. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will dispute before your Lord.

Who does more wrong than someone who lies about God and rejects the truth when it comes to him? Is there not a place in Hell for the blasphemers?

Those who bring the truth and those who accept it are the ones who do right. They will have all that they wish for in the presence of their Lord. This is the reward for those who do good. God will turn away the worst of their deeds and reward them according to the best of what they have done.

Is God not enough for His servant? Yet they try to frighten you with others besides Him. Whoever God leaves to stray, there is no guide for him. And whoever God guides, no one can lead astray. Is God not Mighty and capable of retribution?

If you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will surely say, 'God.' Say, 'Do you see then? Can those you invoke besides God remove His harm or withhold His mercy?' Say, 'God is sufficient for me. In Him, the trusting put their trust.'

Say, 'O my people! Do whatever you can; I will do my part. Soon you will know who will face a penalty of ignominy and who will be in the Fire.'""Who will face a disgraceful punishment and an everlasting doom?"

We have revealed the Book to you in truth for the guidance of humanity. Whoever follows the guidance benefits their own soul, and whoever strays harms only themselves. You are not responsible for their actions.

God takes the souls at the time of death and during sleep. He keeps those destined to die and sends the others back for a set term. These are signs for those who reflect.

Do they take intercessors besides God? Even if they have no power or understanding? Say, "To God belongs all intercession. He controls the heavens and the earth, and to Him, you will be returned."

When God alone is mentioned, those who do not believe in the Hereafter feel disgusted. But when others are mentioned, they rejoice.

Say, "O God, Creator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unseen and the seen, You will judge between Your servants in their disputes."

Even if the wrongdoers had all the wealth on earth and more, they would offer it as ransom from the punishment on the Day of Judgment. But they will face consequences they never expected.

The evils of their deeds will confront them, and they will be surrounded by what they used to mock.

When trouble touches a person, they cry to Us. But when We bestow a favor, they say, "I got this because of my knowledge." No, it is a test, but most do not understand.

Those before them said the same, but their deeds did not benefit them. The consequences of their actions overtook them, and the same will happen to the wrongdoers of this generation. They cannot escape.

Do they not know that God expands or restricts provision for whom He wills? These are signs for those who believe.

Say, "O my servants who have wronged themselves, do not despair of God's mercy. God forgives all sins. He is the Most Forgiving, Most Merciful."

Turn to your Lord in repentance and submit to Him before the punishment comes, and you cannot be helped.

Follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your Lord before the punishment comes suddenly, while you are unaware.

Lest a soul should say, "Woe to me for neglecting my duty to God and being among the mockers."

Or it should say, "If only God had guided me, I would have been among the righteous."

Or it should say when it sees the punishment, "If only I had another chance, I would be among the doers of good."

But the reply will be, "No, My signs came to you, but you rejected them, were arrogant, and disbelieved."

On the Day of Judgment, you will see those who lied against God with their faces turned black.Isn't Hell the home for the arrogant? On the Day of Resurrection, you will see those who lied about God with their faces darkened. Isn't Hell the place for the proud?

But God will save the righteous and bring them to a place of safety. No evil will touch them, and they will not grieve. God is the Creator and Guardian of all things.

To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. Those who reject God's signs are the true losers. Say, "Do you order me to worship someone other than God, you ignorant ones?"

It has been revealed to you, as it was to those before you, that if you associate partners with God, your deeds will be in vain, and you will be among the losers. Worship God alone and be thankful.

They have not valued God as He deserves. On the Day of Judgment, the whole earth will be in His grasp, and the heavens will be rolled up in His right hand. Glory to Him, He is above what they associate with Him.

The Trumpet will be blown, and everyone in the heavens and on earth will fall unconscious, except those God wills. Then it will be blown again, and they will stand up, looking on.

The earth will shine with the light of its Lord, the Record of Deeds will be placed open, and the prophets and witnesses will be brought forward. A just decision will be pronounced, and no one will be wronged.

Every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and God knows best what they do. The disbelievers will be led to Hell in crowds. When they arrive, its gates will be opened, and the keepers will ask, "Did messengers not come to you from among yourselves, reciting your Lord's signs and warning you of this Day?" They will say, "Yes, but the decree of punishment is justified against the disbelievers."

They will be told, "Enter the gates of Hell to dwell there. What an evil abode for the arrogant!"

But those who feared their Lord will be led to the Garden in crowds. When they arrive, its gates will be opened, and the keepers will say, "Peace be upon you! You have done well, so enter to dwell forever."

They will say, "Praise be to God, who has fulfilled His promise to us and given us this land to inherit. We can dwell in the Garden as we please. How excellent a reward for those who work righteousness!"

You will see the angels surrounding the Throne, singing Glory and Praise to their Lord. The judgment will be made in perfect justice, and the final cry will be, "Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds!"

Chapter 40: AL-GHAFIR (THE FORGIVER)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Ha Mim. The revelation of this Book is from God, Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge, who forgives sin, accepts repentance, is strict in punishment, and has a long reach in all things. There is no god but He; to Him is the final goal.

None can dispute God's signs except the unbelievers. Do not let their strutting about through the land deceive you. Before them, people denied the signs—like the people of Noah and the Confederates of Evil after them. Every people plotted against their messenger.The people of Noah and the groups after them denied their prophets. Each nation tried to capture their messenger and argued with falsehood to reject the truth. But I seized them, and how terrible was My punishment!

Thus, the decree of your Lord proved true against the unbelievers: they are indeed the companions of the Fire.

Those who carry the Throne and those around it sing praises to their Lord, believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believe, saying, "Our Lord, Your mercy and knowledge encompass all things. Forgive those who repent and follow Your path, and protect them from the punishment of the Blazing Fire.

And grant, our Lord, that they enter the Gardens of Eternity, which You have promised them, along with the righteous among their ancestors, their spouses, and their descendants. You are the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

And protect them from all ills. Anyone You protect from ills on that Day will have received Your mercy, and that is the highest achievement."

The unbelievers will be addressed: "God's aversion to you is greater than your aversion to yourselves, for you were called to the faith, but you refused."

They will say, "Our Lord, You made us die twice and gave us life twice. Now we confess our sins. Is there any way out?"

The answer will be, "This is because when God alone was invoked, you disbelieved, but when partners were associated with Him, you believed. The command belongs to God, the Most High, the Most Great."

He is the One who shows you His signs and sends down sustenance for you from the sky. Only those who turn to God will take heed.

So call upon God with sincere devotion, even though the unbelievers may detest it.

He is exalted in ranks, the Lord of the Throne. By His command, He sends the Spirit to any of His servants He pleases, to warn them of the Day of Meeting.

On that Day, they will all come forth, and nothing about them will be hidden from God. Whose will be the dominion that Day? It will be God's, the One, the Irresistible.

On that Day, every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned, and no injustice will be done. God is swift in taking account.

Warn them of the Day that is drawing near, when hearts will come right up to the throats to choke them. The wrongdoers will have no friend or intercessor who will be listened to.

God knows the deceitful glances and what the hearts conceal.

God will judge with justice and truth, but those whom people invoke besides Him cannot judge at all. God alone hears and sees everything.

Do they not travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before them? They were superior in strength and left more traces in the land, but God called them to account for their sins, and they had no one to defend them against God.

That was because their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they rejected them. So God called them to account, for He is strong and severe in punishment.

We sent Moses with Our signs and an...Moses was sent with clear signs and authority to Pharaoh, Haman, and Qarun, but they dismissed him as a lying sorcerer. When Moses brought the truth from God, they plotted to kill the sons of those who believed in him and spared their women, but their plans were doomed to fail.

Pharaoh said, "Let me kill Moses and let him call upon his Lord. I fear he will change your religion or cause chaos in the land." Moses responded, "I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning."

A believer from Pharaoh's people, who had kept his faith hidden, said, "Will you kill a man just because he says, 'My Lord is God,' and has brought clear signs from your Lord? If he is lying, his lie will be on him, but if he is truthful, you will face the consequences of what he warns you about. God does not guide those who are extravagant and liars."

He continued, "O my people! Today you have power in the land, but who will save us from God's punishment if it comes? Pharaoh said, 'I only show you what I see and guide you to the right path.'"

The believer warned, "O my people! I fear for you a fate like that of the previous nations, like the people of Noah, 'Ad, and Thamud, and those after them. God does not wish injustice for His servants. O my people! I fear for you a Day when there will be mutual calling and wailing, a Day when you will turn and flee with no protector from God. Whoever God leaves to stray, there is no guide for him."

He reminded them, "Joseph came to you before with clear signs, but you doubted his message. When he died, you said, 'God will not send another messenger after him.' Thus, God leaves to stray those who are extravagant and doubters, those who dispute God's signs without any authority. This is greatly hated by God and the believers. God seals the heart of every arrogant and obstinate transgressor."

Pharaoh said, "O Haman! Build me a lofty palace so I may reach the ways and means to the heavens and look upon the god of Moses, though I think he is a liar." Thus, Pharaoh's evil deeds were made appealing to him, and he was hindered from the right path. His plot ended in ruin.

The believer continued, "O my people! Follow me, and I will guide you to the right path. This worldly life is just temporary convenience; the Hereafter is the lasting home. Whoever does evil will be repaid with the like of it, but whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, will enter the Garden of Bliss, where they will have abundance without measure."

He concluded, "O my people! How strange it is that I call you to salvation while you call me to the Fire. You call me to disbelieve in God and associate partners with Him, of whom I have no knowledge, while I call you to the Exalted in Power, who forgives again and again.""You call me to reject God and worship others without any knowledge, while I call you to the Mighty, the Most Forgiving. What you call me to has no basis in this world or the Hereafter, and our return will be to God. The transgressors will be companions of the Fire.

You will remember my words one day. I entrust my affairs to God, for He watches over His servants. God saved him from their evil plans, but the punishment surrounded Pharaoh's people.

They are exposed to the Fire morning and evening, and on the Day of Judgment, it will be said, 'Throw Pharaoh's people into the severest punishment.' In the Fire, they will argue, and the weak will say to the arrogant, 'We followed you; can you take some of the Fire from us?' The arrogant will reply, 'We are all in this together. God has judged between His servants.'

Those in the Fire will ask the keepers of Hell to pray to their Lord to lighten the punishment for a day. The keepers will ask, 'Did your messengers not come to you with clear signs?' They will say, 'Yes.' The keepers will reply, 'Then pray, but the prayer of disbelievers is in vain.'

We will help our messengers and those who believe in this life and on the Day when the witnesses stand forth. On that Day, excuses will not benefit the wrongdoers; they will have the curse and the home of misery.

We gave Moses the Book of Guidance, and it was inherited by the Children of Israel, a guide and a reminder for people of understanding. Be patient, for God's promise is true. Ask forgiveness for your faults and praise your Lord in the evening and morning.

Those who dispute God's signs without authority are filled with pride they will never attain. Seek refuge in God, for He hears and sees all things. The creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind, but most people do not understand.

The blind and those who see are not equal, nor are those who believe and do good equal to those who do evil. The Hour is coming without doubt, yet most people do not believe. Your Lord says, 'Call on Me, and I will answer you. Those too arrogant to serve Me will enter Hell in humiliation.'

God made the night for rest and the day for seeing. He is full of grace and bounty, yet most people are ungrateful. God is your Creator; there is no god but Him. How are you turned away from the truth? Those who reject God's signs are deluded.

God made the earth a resting place and the sky a canopy. He shaped you beautifully and provided you with good things. Such is God, your Lord. Glory to God, the Lord of the Worlds!"He is the Living One. There is no god but Him. Call upon Him with sincere devotion. Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds!

Say: "I have been forbidden to worship those you call upon besides God, as clear signs have come to me from my Lord. I am commanded to submit to the Lord of the Worlds."

He created you from dust, then from a sperm-drop, then from a clot. He brings you forth as a child, lets you grow to full strength, and then become old, though some die before reaching this stage. This is so you may understand.

He gives life and death. When He decides upon an affair, He says to it, "Be," and it is.

Have you not seen those who dispute God's signs? How are they turned away from reality?

Those who reject the Book and the revelations sent with Our messengers will soon know the truth. When yokes are around their necks and chains drag them through boiling water and into the Fire, they will be asked, "Where are the deities you worshipped besides God?" They will say, "They have left us. We did not worship anything real." Thus, God leaves the disbelievers to stray.

This is because you exulted on earth without right and behaved insolently. Enter the gates of Hell to dwell therein. Evil is the abode of the arrogant.

So be patient, for God's promise is true. Whether We show you some part of what We promise them or take your soul before that, they will all return to Us.

We sent messengers before you. Some of their stories We have related to you, and some We have not. No messenger could bring a sign except by God's permission. When God's command comes, the matter is decided in truth and justice, and those who stood on falsehoods perish.

God made cattle for you to ride and eat. They provide other benefits, and you can fulfill your needs through them. You are carried on them and on ships.

He shows you His signs. Which of God's signs will you deny?

Do they not travel through the earth and see the end of those before them? They were more numerous and stronger, yet all they accomplished was of no profit to them.

When their messengers brought them clear signs, they exulted in their own knowledge. But the very wrath they mocked surrounded them.

When they saw Our punishment, they said, "We believe in God alone and reject what we used to associate with Him." But their faith did not benefit them when they saw Our punishment. This has always been God's way with His servants, and the disbelievers are ruined.This chapter, "Fussilat" (Explained in Detail), contains 54 verses and was revealed in Mecca. 

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Ha Mim.
2. This is a revelation from God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
3. It is a Book with verses explained in detail, an Arabic Qur'an for people who understand.
4. It brings good news and a warning, but most people turn away and do not listen.
5. They say, "Our hearts are covered, our ears are deaf, and there is a barrier between us and you. Do what you will; we will do what we will."
6. Say, "I am just a human like you. It has been revealed to me that your God is one God. So, follow the straight path to Him and seek His forgiveness. Woe to those who associate others with God."
7. Those who do not give charity and deny the Hereafter.
8. For those who believe and do good deeds, there is an everlasting reward.
9. Say, "Do you deny the One who created the earth in two days? Do you set up equals with Him? He is the Lord of all the worlds."
10. He placed mountains on the earth, blessed it, and measured its sustenance in four days, equally for all who seek it.
11. Then He turned to the sky, which was smoke, and said to it and the earth, "Come willingly or unwillingly." They said, "We come willingly."
12. He completed them as seven heavens in two days and assigned each heaven its duty. He adorned the lowest heaven with lights and protection. This is the decree of the Mighty, the All-Knowing.
13. If they turn away, say, "I have warned you of a punishment like the one that struck 'Ad and Thamud."
14. When messengers came to them from all directions, saying, "Worship none but God," they said, "If our Lord had willed, He would have sent down angels. We disbelieve in what you have been sent with."
15. The 'Ad were arrogant and said, "Who is stronger than us?" Did they not see that God, who created them, was stronger? Yet they denied Our signs.
16. So, We sent a furious wind upon them for several days to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in this life. The punishment of the Hereafter will be even more humiliating, and they will have no help.
17. As for Thamud, We guided them, but they preferred blindness over guidance. So, the punishment of humiliation seized them for what they earned.
18. But We saved those who believed and practiced righteousness.
19. On the Day when the enemies of God are gathered to the Fire, they will be marched in ranks.
20. When they reach it, their hearing, sight, and skins will testify against them for what they used to do.
21. They will ask their skins, "Why do you testify against us?" The skins will reply, "God, who makes everything speak, has made us speak. He created you the first time, and to Him, you will return."
22. You did not hide yourselves so that your hearing, sight, and skins would not testify against you. You thought that God did not know much of what you did."You didn't hide yourselves thinking your ears, eyes, and skin wouldn't testify against you, but you assumed God didn't know much of what you did. This assumption about your Lord has led to your ruin, and now you are among the lost.

If they endure, the Fire will still be their home. If they ask for favor, they won't receive it. We assigned them companions who made their past and present seem appealing. The same fate that befell previous generations of jinn and humans now applies to them—they are utterly lost.

The disbelievers say, 'Don't listen to this Qur'an, talk over it so you might overpower it.' But We will make them taste a severe punishment and repay them for their worst deeds. This is the fate of God's enemies: the Fire, their eternal home, as a reward for rejecting Our signs.

The disbelievers will say, 'Our Lord! Show us those who misled us among jinn and humans so we can trample them underfoot and make them the lowest.' For those who say, 'Our Lord is God,' and remain steadfast, angels will descend upon them, saying, 'Don't fear or grieve, but receive the good news of the Paradise you were promised. We are your protectors in this life and the Hereafter. You will have everything your souls desire and ask for—a hospitable gift from the Forgiving, the Merciful.'

Who is better in speech than one who calls to God, does good deeds, and says, 'I am one of the Muslims'? Goodness and evil are not equal. Repel evil with what is better, and the one who was your enemy will become your close friend. But only those who are patient and fortunate will achieve this. If the devil incites you to discord, seek refuge in God. He hears and knows everything.

Among His signs are the night and day, the sun and moon. Don't prostrate to the sun or moon, but to God who created them. If they are arrogant, those with your Lord glorify Him night and day without tiring. Among His signs is the barren earth that comes to life with rain. He who gives life to the dead earth can surely give life to the dead. He has power over all things.

Those who distort Our signs are not hidden from Us. Is the one cast into the Fire better, or the one who comes safe on the Day of Judgment? Do what you will; He sees everything you do. Those who reject the Message when it comes to them are not hidden from Us. It is a powerful Book, free from falsehood, sent down by the Wise, the Praised One. Nothing is said to you that wasn't said to previous messengers."Your Lord has control over both forgiveness and severe punishment. Nothing is said to you, Muhammad, that wasn't said to the messengers before you. Your Lord is the master of forgiveness and also of dire punishment.

If We had sent this Qur'an in a language other than Arabic, they would have said, "Why aren't its verses explained in detail? A non-Arabic book and an Arab messenger?" Say, "It is a guide and a healing for those who believe. For those who don't believe, it is like deafness in their ears and blindness in their eyes. They are like people being called from a distant place."

We gave Moses the Book before, but people disputed about it. If it weren't for a decree from your Lord, their differences would have been settled. But they remain in doubt and suspicion about it.

Whoever does good, it benefits their own soul. Whoever does evil, it harms their own soul. Your Lord is never unjust to His servants.

Only God knows the Hour of Judgment. No fruit emerges from its sheath, and no female conceives or gives birth without His knowledge. On the Day He asks, "Where are My partners?" they will say, "We confess, none of us can bear witness to them."

The deities they used to invoke will abandon them, and they will realize they have no escape.

Humans never tire of asking for good things, but when evil touches them, they lose hope and despair.

When We give them a taste of mercy after adversity, they say, "This is due to my merit. I don't think the Hour will come, but if I am brought back to my Lord, I will have good things with Him." But We will show the disbelievers the truth of their deeds and make them taste severe punishment.

When We bestow favors on humans, they turn away and distance themselves. But when evil touches them, they are full of prolonged prayer.

Say, "Consider if this revelation is from God and you reject it. Who is more astray than one who is in open conflict with God?"

We will show them Our signs in the universe and within themselves until it becomes clear to them that this is the truth. Isn't it enough that your Lord is a witness over all things?

Are they still in doubt about meeting their Lord? Indeed, He encompasses all things.

Chapter 42: ASH-SHURA (COUNCIL, CONSULTATION)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Ha-Mim. 'Ain. Sin. Qaf.

This is how God, the Mighty, the Wise, sends inspiration to you, Muhammad, as He did to those before you.

To Him belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. He is the Most High, the Most Great.

The heavens almost break apart from above them, and the angels praise their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth. Indeed, God is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

As for those who take protectors other than Him, God watches over them, and you are not responsible for their affairs.

We have sent you an Arabic Qur'an so you may warn the Mother of Cities and those around it, and warn them of the Day of Assembly, which is certain to come. Some will be in the Garden, and some in the Blazing Fire.If God had willed, He could have made everyone a single community, but He admits whom He wills into His mercy. Wrongdoers will have no protector or helper. 

Have they taken protectors besides Him? God alone is the Protector. He gives life to the dead and has power over all things.

Whatever you differ about, the decision rests with God. He is my Lord; in Him I trust and to Him I turn.

He is the Creator of the heavens and the earth. He made pairs from among yourselves and among cattle, multiplying you. There is nothing like Him; He hears and sees all things.

To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He enlarges and restricts sustenance to whom He wills. He knows all things.

He has established the same religion for you as He enjoined on Noah, and that which We revealed to you, and that which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: to remain steadfast in religion and not to be divided. It is hard for those who worship other things than God to accept this. God chooses whom He wills and guides to Himself those who turn to Him.

They became divided only after knowledge reached them, through selfish envy. Had it not been for a decree from your Lord, the matter would have been settled between them. Those who inherited the Book after them are in doubt concerning it.

Call them to the faith and stand steadfast as you are commanded. Do not follow their vain desires. Say, "I believe in the Book God has sent down, and I am commanded to judge justly between you. God is our Lord and your Lord. We are responsible for our deeds, and you for yours. There is no contention between us and you. God will bring us together, and to Him is our final goal."

Those who dispute concerning God after He has been accepted have a futile dispute in the sight of their Lord. They will face a terrible penalty.

God has sent down the Book in truth and the Balance. Perhaps the Hour is close at hand.

Only those who do not believe in it wish to hasten it. Those who believe hold it in awe and know it is the truth. Those who dispute concerning the Hour are far astray.

God is gracious to His servants. He provides sustenance to whom He pleases. He is strong and mighty.

Whoever desires the rewards of the Hereafter, We will increase his rewards. Whoever desires the rewards of this world, We grant him some of it, but he has no share in the Hereafter.

Have they partners who have established some religion without God's permission? If it weren't for the decree of judgment, the matter would have been decided between them. Wrongdoers will have a grievous penalty.

You will see the wrongdoers in fear because of what they have earned, and the burden must fall on them. But those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in the luxuriant meadows of the Gardens. They will have all that they wish for before their Lord.You will see the wrongdoers fearful of what they have earned, and it will surely befall them, while those who believe and do good deeds will be in the lush meadows of the Gardens, having whatever they wish from their Lord. This is the great bounty from God.

This is the good news God gives to His servants who believe and do righteous deeds. Say, "I ask no reward from you except love for my close relatives." Whoever does good, We will increase their good. God is Forgiving and Appreciative.

Do they say, "He has fabricated a lie against God"? If God willed, He could seal your heart. God wipes out falsehood and confirms the truth by His words. He knows the secrets of all hearts.

He is the One who accepts repentance from His servants and forgives sins. He knows all that you do. He listens to those who believe and do righteous deeds and gives them more of His bounty. But for the disbelievers, there is a terrible penalty.

If God were to give abundant provision to His servants, they would transgress beyond bounds on the earth. But He sends it down in due measure as He pleases. He is well aware and watchful over His servants.

He is the One who sends down rain after people have lost hope and spreads His mercy. He is the Protector, Worthy of all Praise.

Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the living creatures He has scattered through them. He has the power to gather them together whenever He wills.

Whatever misfortune happens to you is because of what your hands have done, but He forgives much. You cannot escape on earth, and besides God, you have no protector or helper.

Among His signs are the ships that sail smoothly through the ocean, tall as mountains. If He wills, He can still the wind, making them motionless on the ocean's surface. In this are signs for everyone who patiently perseveres and is grateful.

Or He can cause them to perish because of what people have earned, but He forgives much. Those who dispute about Our signs should know they have no escape.

Whatever you are given is just a convenience of this life, but what is with God is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord. They avoid major sins and shameful deeds, and when they are angry, they forgive.

They respond to their Lord, establish regular prayer, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and spend out of what We have provided them. When an oppressive wrong is inflicted on them, they defend themselves.

The recompense for an injury is an injury equal to it, but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation, their reward is from God. God does not love wrongdoers.

There is no blame on those who defend themselves after being wronged. The blame is only on those who oppress people and transgress beyond bounds through the land, defying right and justice. For them, there will be a grievous penalty.

But if anyone shows patience and forgives, that is a sign of courageous will and resolution in the conduct of affairs.You will see the wrongdoers fearful of what they have earned, and it will surely befall them, while those who believe and do good deeds will be in the lush meadows of the Gardens, having whatever they wish from their Lord. This is the great bounty from God.

This is the good news God gives to His servants who believe and do righteous deeds. Say, "I ask no reward from you except love for my close relatives." Whoever does good, We will increase their good. God is Forgiving and Appreciative.

Do they say, "He has fabricated a lie against God"? If God willed, He could seal your heart. God wipes out falsehood and confirms the truth by His words. He knows the secrets of all hearts.

He is the One who accepts repentance from His servants and forgives sins. He knows all that you do. He listens to those who believe and do righteous deeds and gives them more of His bounty. But for the disbelievers, there is a terrible penalty.

If God were to give abundant provision to His servants, they would transgress beyond bounds on the earth. But He sends it down in due measure as He pleases. He is well aware and watchful over His servants.

He is the One who sends down rain after people have lost hope and spreads His mercy. He is the Protector, Worthy of all Praise.

Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the living creatures He has scattered through them. He has the power to gather them together whenever He wills.

Whatever misfortune happens to you is because of what your hands have done, but He forgives much. You cannot escape on earth, and besides God, you have no protector or helper.

Among His signs are the ships that sail smoothly through the ocean, tall as mountains. If He wills, He can still the wind, making them motionless on the ocean's surface. In this are signs for everyone who patiently perseveres and is grateful.

Or He can cause them to perish because of what people have earned, but He forgives much. Those who dispute about Our signs should know they have no escape.

Whatever you are given is just a convenience of this life, but what is with God is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord. They avoid major sins and shameful deeds, and when they are angry, they forgive.

They respond to their Lord, establish regular prayer, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and spend out of what We have provided them. When an oppressive wrong is inflicted on them, they defend themselves.

The recompense for an injury is an injury equal to it, but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation, their reward is from God. God does not love wrongdoers.

There is no blame on those who defend themselves after being wronged. The blame is only on those who oppress people and transgress beyond bounds through the land, defying right and justice. For them, there will be a grievous penalty.

But if anyone shows patience and forgives, that is a sign of courageous will and resolution in the conduct of affairs.

You will see the wrongdoers, when they face the penalty, say, "Is there any way to return?" Those whom God leads astray have no protector after Him. You will see the wrongdoers when they see the punishment, saying, "Is there any way to return?"

You will see them brought forward to the penalty, humbled by disgrace, looking with a stealthy glance. The believers will say, "Those are indeed in loss, who have given to perdition their own selves and those belonging to them on the Day of Judgment. Truly the wrongdoers are in a lasting penalty!"

They will have no protectors to help them other than God. Those whom God leaves to stray have no way to the goal.

Listen to your Lord before a Day comes from God which cannot be averted. On that Day, you will have no refuge nor any room for denial of your sins.

If they turn away, We have not sent you as a guard over them. Your duty is only to convey the message. When We give man a taste of mercy from Us, he exults in it, but when some ill happens to him because of what his hands have done, then man is ungrateful.

To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He bestows children, male or female, according to His will.

Or He bestows both males and females, and He leaves barren whom He wills. He is full of Knowledge and Power.

It is not fitting for a man that God should speak to him except by inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger to reveal, with God's permission, what God wills. He is Most High, Most Wise.

And thus have We, by Our command, sent inspiration to you. You did not know what Revelation was, nor what Faith was, but We have made the Qur'an a light, guiding whom We will of Our servants. You indeed guide to the Straight Way.

The Way of God, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth. All affairs tend towards God."so that we can sit firmly on their backs and remember the favor of our Lord, saying: 'Glory be to Him who made this subservient to us, for we could not have done it on our own.' And surely, we must return to our Lord.

Yet, they attribute a share of His divinity to some of His servants! Truly, humans are ungrateful. Do they claim that He has taken daughters from what He creates and granted sons to you? When one of them hears news of what he likens to God, his face darkens with grief. Is one brought up among trinkets and unable to give a clear account in a dispute to be associated with God?

They make angels, who serve God, into females. Did they witness their creation? Their testimony will be recorded, and they will be questioned. They say, 'If it had been God's will, we would not have worshipped these deities.' They have no knowledge of this; they only lie.

Have We given them a book before this to which they are holding fast? No, they say, 'We found our fathers following a certain religion, and we guide ourselves by their footsteps.' Whenever We sent a warner to any people, the wealthy ones among them said, 'We found our fathers following a religion, and we will follow in their footsteps.' The warner said, 'Even if I bring you better guidance than what your fathers followed?' They replied, 'We deny that you are sent.'

So, We exacted retribution from them. See the end of those who rejected the truth! Abraham said to his father and his people, 'I disassociate myself from what you worship, except for Him who created me, for He will guide me.' He left this as a lasting word among his descendants so they might return to God.

I have given the good things of this life to these people and their fathers until the truth and a clear messenger came to them. But when the truth came, they said, 'This is sorcery, and we reject it.' They also said, 'Why wasn't this Qur'an sent down to some leading man in either of the two chief cities?' Is it they who distribute the mercy of your Lord? We distribute among them their livelihood in this world, raising some above others in rank so that some may command work from others. But the mercy of your Lord is better than the wealth they amass.

If it weren't for the risk of all people becoming one evil community, We would have provided for everyone who blasphemes against God silver roofs for their houses and silver stairways to ascend, silver doors, and silver couches to recline on, and gold adornments. But all this is just the convenience of this life; the Hereafter with your Lord is for the righteous.

If anyone turns away from the remembrance of God, We appoint a devil to be his companion. These devils hinder them from the path, but they think they are rightly guided. When such a person comes to Us, he will say to his evil companion, 'I wish there was a great distance between me and you!' What an evil companion indeed!"When the Day of Judgment comes, those who were friends will become enemies, except for the righteous. On that day, God will say to His devoted servants, "My worshippers, you have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.On the Day of Judgment, God will say to His devoted servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper."

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, "You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing."

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, "This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds."

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, "Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?"

They will cry out, "Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do." But they will be told, "Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no"On that day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warner came to you. So taste the punishment, for the wrongdoers have no helper.'

God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.

On that Day, God will say to His servants, 'You have nothing to fear today, nor will you grieve. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, rejoicing.'

In Paradise, they will be served with golden dishes and cups, and there will be everything their hearts desire and their eyes delight in. They will be told, 'This is the Paradise you have inherited because of your deeds.'

But for the wrongdoers, it will be said, 'Taste the punishment of eternity. Are you being repaid for anything except what you used to do?'

They will cry out, 'Our Lord, remove us from this torment, and we will do righteous deeds, different from what we used to do.' But they will be told, 'Did We not give you lives long enough for anyone who would remember to remember? And the warIn the heavens and the earth, there are signs for those who believe. In your own creation and the scattering of animals across the earth, there are signs for those with assured faith. The alternation of night and day, the sustenance God sends from the sky to revive the earth, and the changing winds are signs for those who understand.

These are the signs of God, recited to you in truth. What will they believe in if they reject God's signs? Woe to every sinful liar who hears God's revelations but remains arrogant, as if he didn't hear them. Announce to him a painful punishment. When he learns of Our signs, he mocks them. For such people, there is a humiliating penalty.

In front of them is Hell. Nothing they earned or any protectors they took besides God will benefit them. They will face a tremendous penalty. This is true guidance, and those who reject the signs of their Lord will face a grievous penalty.

God has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail by His command, allowing you to seek His bounty and be grateful. He has made everything in the heavens and on earth subservient to you. These are signs for those who reflect.

Tell those who believe to forgive those who do not look forward to the Days of God. It is for Him to recompense each person according to what they have earned. Whoever does a righteous deed benefits his own soul, and whoever does evil, it works against his own soul. In the end, you will all be brought back to your Lord.

We granted the Children of Israel the Book, the Power of Command, and Prophethood. We gave them good and pure sustenance and favored them above the nations. We gave them clear signs in religious matters, but they fell into disputes out of envy after knowledge had been granted to them. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment regarding their differences.

We have set you on a clear path of religion, so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know. They will be of no use to you in the sight of God. Wrongdoers are protectors of each other, but God is the Protector of the righteous.

These are clear evidences and guidance for those with assured faith. Do those who seek evil ways think they will be treated the same as those who believe and do righteous deeds? Bad is their judgment! God created the heavens and the earth with truth so that every soul may be repaid for what it has earned, and none will be wronged.

Have you seen the one who takes his own vain desire as his god? God, knowing this, has left him astray, sealed his hearing and heart, and covered his sight. Who will guide him after God has withdrawn guidance? Will you not then receive admonition?

They say, "What is there but our life in this world?""They say, 'There is nothing but our life in this world; we live and die, and only time destroys us.' But they have no knowledge of this; they are merely guessing. When Our clear signs are recited to them, their only argument is, 'Bring back our forefathers if you are truthful!' Say, 'It is God who gives you life, then causes you to die, then gathers you on the Day of Judgment, about which there is no doubt.' But most people do not understand. To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and on the Day the Hour is established, those who followed falsehood will perish. You will see every community kneeling, each community summoned to its record: 'Today you will be repaid for what you did.' This is Our record that speaks the truth about you; We were recording everything you did.

Those who believed and did righteous deeds will be admitted by their Lord into His mercy. That is the clear triumph. But to those who rejected God, it will be said, 'Were not Our signs recited to you? But you were arrogant and became sinful people.' And when it was said, 'God's promise is true, and there is no doubt about the Hour,' you said, 'We do not know what the Hour is; we think it is just a conjecture, and we are not convinced.' The evil consequences of what they did will become clear to them, and they will be surrounded by what they used to mock. It will be said, 'Today We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours; your abode is the Fire, and you have no helpers.' This is because you took God's signs in jest and were deceived by the life of this world. So today, they will not be brought out of it, nor will they be granted any favor.

Then praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and the earth, Lord of all the worlds. To Him belongs all glory in the heavens and the earth, and He is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom."They say, "This life is all there is; we live, we die, and time alone destroys us." But they have no real knowledge of this; they are just guessing. When Our clear signs are shown to them, they argue, "Bring back our ancestors if you are truthful!" Say, "It is God who gives you life, then causes you to die, and will gather you on the Day of Judgment, about which there is no doubt." But most people do not understand. God owns the heavens and the earth, and on the Day the Hour is established, those who followed falsehood will perish. You will see every community kneeling, each summoned to its record: "Today you will be repaid for what you did." This is Our record that speaks the truth about you; We were recording everything you did.

Those who believed and did good deeds will be admitted by their Lord into His mercy. That is the clear triumph. But to those who rejected God, it will be said, "Were not Our signs recited to you? But you were arrogant and sinful." And when it was said, "God's promise is true, and there is no doubt about the Hour," you said, "We do not know what the Hour is; we think it is just a guess, and we are not convinced." The evil consequences of what they did will become clear to them, and they will be surrounded by what they used to mock. It will be said, "Today We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours; your abode is the Fire, and you have no helpers." This is because you took God's signs in jest and were deceived by the life of this world. So today, they will not be brought out of it, nor will they be granted any favor.

Then praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and the earth, Lord of all the worlds. To Him belongs all glory in the heavens and the earth, and He is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

They say, "He has made it up." Say, "If I have made it up, you do not control anything for me from God; He knows best what you say about it; He is enough as a witness between me and you, and He is the Forgiving, the Merciful." Say, "I am not a new messenger, nor do I know what will happen to me or to you. I follow only what is revealed to me; I am just a clear warner." Say, "Have you considered if this teaching is from God and you reject it, and a witness from the Children of Israel testifies to its similarity with earlier scripture and believes, while you are arrogant? Truly, God does not guide unjust people." The disbelievers say of those who believe, "If this message were good, they would not have believed in it before us!" And since they do not guide themselves by it, they say, "This is an old lie." Before this, there was the Book of Moses as a guide and a mercy, and this Book confirms it in the Arabic tongue; to warn the unjust and give good news to those who do right.

Those who say, "Our Lord is God," and remain firm, will have no fear, nor will they grieve. They will be companions of the Gardens, dwelling there forever as a reward for their good deeds. We have enjoined on man kindness to his parents: his mother bore him with pain and gave birth to him with pain. The carrying and weaning of him is thirty months. When he reaches full strength and attains forty years, he says, "My Lord! Grant me that I may be grateful for Your favor which You have bestowed upon me and my parents, and that I may do righteous deeds that please You; and be gracious to me in my offspring. Truly, I have turned to You and truly do I bow to You in Islam." These are the ones from whom We accept the best of their deeds and overlook their ill deeds; they will be among the companions of the Garden, a promise of truth which they were given.

But there is one who says to his parents, "Fie on you! Do you hold out the promise to me that I shall be raised up, even though generations have passed before me without rising again?" And they seek God's aid, saying, "Woe to you! Believe! The promise of God is true." But he says, "This is nothing but tales of the ancients!" Such are they against whom the sentence among the previous generations of jinn and men has been proved; they will be utterly lost. And to all are assigned degrees according to their deeds, so that God may recompense their deeds, and no injustice will be done to them.

On the Day the disbelievers are placed before the Fire, it will be said to them, "You received your good things in the life of the world and took your pleasure from them; but today you will be recompensed with a penalty of humiliation because you were arrogant on earth without just cause and because you transgressed." Mention Hud, one of 'Ad's own brethren: he warned his people about the winding sand-tracts, but there have been warners before him and after him, saying, "Worship none other than God; truly, I fear for you the penalty of a mighty day." They said, "Have you come to turn us away from our gods? Then bring upon us the calamity you threaten us with if you are telling the truth." He said, "The knowledge of when it will come is only with God."He said, "Only God knows. I am just delivering the message I was sent with, but I see you are ignorant people." When they saw a cloud approaching their valleys, they thought it would bring rain. But it was the calamity they had asked for—a wind carrying a severe punishment. It destroyed everything by the command of its Lord, leaving only their ruins by morning. This is how We repay the sinful.

We had given them power and faculties of hearing, seeing, and intellect, which were of no use because they rejected God's signs. They were surrounded by what they used to mock. We destroyed the towns around you and showed them Our signs in various ways so they might turn to Us. But their false gods did not help them; they abandoned them. This was their lie and invention.

A group of jinn listened to the Qur'an and, when it was finished, they warned their people, saying, "We have heard a Book revealed after Moses, confirming what came before it. It guides to the truth and a straight path. Respond to God's caller and believe in Him. He will forgive your sins and protect you from a painful punishment. Those who do not respond cannot escape on earth and have no protectors besides God. They are in clear error."

Do they not see that God, who created the heavens and the earth and was not tired by their creation, can give life to the dead? He has power over all things. On the Day the disbelievers are placed before the Fire, they will be asked, "Is this not the truth?" They will say, "Yes, by our Lord!" Then they will be told, "Taste the punishment for your disbelief."

Be patient, as the messengers of firm resolve were patient. Do not hasten the punishment for them. On the Day they see what they are promised, it will seem as if they had only tarried for an hour of daylight. This is a clear message. Only the transgressing people will be destroyed.

Chapter 47: Muhammad

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Those who reject God and hinder others from His path will have their deeds rendered useless. But those who believe, do good deeds, and believe in the revelation sent to Muhammad, which is the truth from their Lord, will have their sins removed and their condition improved. This is because those who reject God follow falsehood, while those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. God sets forth lessons for people through these examples.

When you meet the disbelievers in battle, strike at their necks. When you have subdued them, bind them firmly. Afterward, you can either show generosity or ransom them until the war ends. This is the command.If God had willed, He could have punished them directly, but He lets you fight to test you against each other. Those who die in God's cause will never have their deeds wasted. When you meet the disbelievers in battle, strike at their necks until you have subdued them, then bind them firmly. Afterward, you can either release them as a favor or ransom them until the war ends. This is the command. If God had willed, He could have punished them without you, but He tests you through each other. Those who are killed in God's cause will not have their actions go to waste.

Soon, He will guide them and improve their condition, and admit them to the Garden He has promised. Believers, if you support God's cause, He will support you and make your foothold firm. But those who reject God will face destruction, and their deeds will be in vain because they hate what God has revealed. Have they not traveled the earth and seen the fate of those before them who rejected God? God destroyed them, and similar fates await those who disbelieve. God is the protector of those who believe, but disbelievers have no protector.

God will admit those who believe and do good deeds to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath them. Those who reject God will enjoy this world and eat like cattle, but the Fire will be their abode. How many cities stronger than yours, which drove you out, have We destroyed? They had no helper. Is someone who follows clear guidance from their Lord like someone whose evil deeds seem pleasing to them and who follow their desires?

The Garden promised to the righteous has rivers of unpolluted water, milk with unchanging taste, delicious wine, and clear honey. They will have all kinds of fruits and grace from their Lord. Can this be compared to those who will dwell forever in the Fire and drink boiling water that tears their bowels apart?

Among them are those who listen to you, but when they leave, they ask others what you just said. These are people whose hearts God has sealed, and they follow their desires. But those who receive guidance, He increases their guidance and grants them piety. Are they waiting for the Hour to come upon them suddenly? Some signs have already come, but how will they benefit from the warning when it arrives?

Know that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for your sins and for the believing men and women. God knows your movements and your places of rest. Believers ask why a decisive chapter has not been revealed. But when a clear chapter is revealed and fighting is mentioned, you see those with disease in their hearts looking at you as if they are fainting from death. Obedience and a kind word would have been better for them. When the matter is resolved, if they are true to God, it will be better for them.Would you, if given authority, cause chaos in the land and break family ties? These are the people God has cursed, making them deaf and blind. Do they not reflect on the Quran, or are their hearts locked? Those who turn away after guidance has been shown to them are led astray by Satan, who fills them with false hopes. They say to those who hate what God has revealed, "We will obey you in some matters," but God knows their secrets. How will it be when the angels take their souls at death, striking their faces and backs? This is because they followed what angered God and hated what pleased Him, making their deeds worthless. Do those with disease in their hearts think God will not reveal their hatred? If God willed, He could show them to you, and you would recognize them by their speech. God knows your deeds. We will test you until we know who strives and is patient among you. Those who reject God and hinder others from His path, opposing the Messenger after guidance has been shown, will not harm God but will make their deeds fruitless. Believers, obey God and the Messenger, and do not let your deeds go to waste. Those who reject God and hinder others from His path, then die as disbelievers, will not be forgiven by God. Do not be weak and call for peace when you should be victorious. God is with you and will not let your good deeds go unrewarded. The life of this world is just play and amusement. If you believe and guard against evil, He will reward you and not ask for your possessions. If He did ask and pressed you, you would withhold, revealing your ill feelings. You are invited to spend in the way of God, but some of you are stingy. Whoever is stingy is stingy against their own soul. God is self-sufficient, and you are in need. If you turn away, He will replace you with others who will not be like you.

Chapter 48: AL-FATH (VICTORY, CONQUEST)
In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. We have granted you a clear victory,
2. So that God may forgive your past and future sins, complete His favor upon you, and guide you on the straight path,
3. And that God may help you with a powerful help.
4. It is He who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the believers to increase their faith. To God belong the forces of the heavens and the earth, and God is full of knowledge and wisdom.
5. He will admit the believing men and women to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever, and remove their ills. This is the highest achievement in the sight of God.
6. He will punish the hypocrites and polytheists, men and women, who have evil thoughts about God. They will face a round of evil, the wrath of God, and His curse....prepared them for Hell, a terrible destination. God will punish the hypocritical men and women, and the idolatrous men and women, who harbor evil thoughts about Him. They will face misfortune, God's wrath, and His curse, and Hell is ready for them—a dreadful end.

To God belong the forces of the heavens and the earth, and He is all-powerful and wise. We have sent you, Muhammad, as a witness, a bringer of good news, and a warner, so that people may believe in God and His Messenger, honor Him, revere Him, and glorify Him morning and evening.

Those who pledge allegiance to you, Muhammad, are actually pledging allegiance to God. God's hand is over their hands. Whoever breaks this oath harms only themselves, but whoever keeps their covenant with God will receive a great reward.

The desert Arabs who stayed behind will say, "We were busy with our flocks and families, so ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, "Who can intervene on your behalf with God if He intends harm or benefit for you? God is fully aware of what you do."

You thought the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families, and this seemed pleasing to your hearts. You harbored evil thoughts and became a doomed people. If anyone does not believe in God and His Messenger, We have prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers.

To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. God is oft-forgiving, most merciful.

Those who lagged behind will say, when you march to take war booty, "Let us follow you." They wish to change God's decree. Say, "You shall not follow us; God has already declared this beforehand." They will say, "You are jealous of us." But they understand little.

Say to the desert Arabs who lagged behind, "You will be called to fight against a people of great might until they submit. If you obey, God will grant you a good reward, but if you turn back as you did before, He will punish you with a grievous penalty."

There is no blame on the blind, the lame, or the sick if they do not join the war. But whoever obeys God and His Messenger will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow, and whoever turns back will be punished with a painful penalty.

God was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, sent down tranquility upon them, and rewarded them with a near victory and many gains. God is mighty and wise.

God has promised you many gains that you will acquire. He has given you these beforehand and restrained the hands of men from you, so it may be a sign for the believers and guide you on the straight path. There are other gains you have not yet achieved, but God has encompassed them, and He has power over all things.If the disbelievers fight you, they will surely turn and flee, finding no protector or helper. This has always been God's way, and you will not find any change in His method. He is the one who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in Mecca after giving you victory. God sees everything you do.

They are the ones who denied the revelation and prevented you from reaching the Sacred Mosque and the sacrificial animals from reaching their place of sacrifice. If it weren't for the believing men and women you might have harmed unknowingly, God would have allowed you to force your way. But He held back your hands to admit into His mercy whom He wills. If the believers and disbelievers had been clearly separated, We would have punished the disbelievers with a severe punishment.

When the disbelievers harbored zealotry in their hearts, God sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and the believers, making them adhere to the command of self-restraint. They were entitled to it and worthy of it, and God knows all things.

God fulfilled the vision for His Messenger: you will enter the Sacred Mosque, if God wills, with minds secure, heads shaved, hair cut short, and without fear. He knew what you did not know and granted you a near victory.

He is the one who sent His Messenger with guidance and the true religion to make it prevail over all other religions. God is enough as a witness.

Muhammad is the Messenger of God, and those with him are strong against disbelievers but compassionate among themselves. You will see them bowing and prostrating in prayer, seeking grace from God and His pleasure. The marks of their prostration are on their faces. This is their description in the Torah and the Gospel: like a seed that sprouts, strengthens, and stands firm, delighting the sowers. This enrages the disbelievers. God has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward.

Chapter 49: AL-HUJRAAT (THE PRIVATE APARTMENTS, THE INNER APARTMENTS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

O you who believe! Do not put yourselves forward before God and His Messenger, but fear God. God hears and knows all things.

O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak loudly to him as you do to one another, lest your deeds become void without you realizing it.

Those who lower their voices in the presence of God's Messenger are the ones whose hearts God has tested for piety. They will have forgiveness and a great reward.

Those who shout to you from outside the private apartments mostly lack understanding.

If they had patience until you came out to them, it would be better for them. God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

O you who believe! If a wicked person comes to you with any news, verify it, lest you harm people unknowingly and later regret what you have done.Believers, if a wicked person brings you news, verify it to avoid harming others unknowingly and later regretting it. Know that God's Messenger is among you. If he followed your wishes in many matters, you would face trouble. But God has made faith dear to you and made disbelief, wickedness, and rebellion hateful to you. Such are the rightly guided, by God's grace and wisdom.

If two groups of believers fight, make peace between them. If one group wrongs the other, fight the wrongdoers until they return to God's command. Then, make peace justly, for God loves those who act fairly. Believers are brothers, so make peace between your brothers and fear God to receive His mercy.

Believers, do not mock or insult each other, as some may be better than others. Avoid suspicion, as some suspicion is sinful. Do not spy or backbite. Would you like to eat the flesh of your dead brother? No, you would hate it. Fear God, for He is Merciful.

O mankind, We created you from a male and a female and made you into nations and tribes to know one another. The most honored in God's sight is the most righteous. God knows everything.

The desert Arabs say, "We believe." Say, "You have not yet believed; say instead, 'We have submitted,' for faith has not entered your hearts. If you obey God and His Messenger, He will not diminish your deeds. God is Forgiving, Merciful."

True believers are those who believe in God and His Messenger without doubt and strive with their wealth and lives for God's cause. They are sincere. Say, "Do you teach God about your religion? God knows everything in the heavens and the earth."

They think they favor you by becoming Muslims. Say, "Do not consider your Islam a favor to me; rather, God has favored you by guiding you to faith if you are truthful." God knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth and sees all that you do.

Chapter 50: QAF (THE LETTER QAF)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an, they wonder that a warner has come from among them. The disbelievers say, "This is a strange thing! When we die and become dust, shall we live again? That is a far return!" We know how much the earth takes of them, and with Us is a record guarding it.We know what the earth takes from them, and with Us is a record that preserves everything. But they deny the truth when it comes to them, so they are in a state of confusion. Have they not looked at the sky above them, how We have made it and adorned it without any flaws? And the earth, We have spread it out, set firm mountains on it, and produced every kind of beautiful growth. This is a vision and a reminder for every servant who turns to God.

We send down blessed rain from the sky, producing gardens and grain for harvests, and tall palm trees with clustered fruit. This is sustenance for God's servants, and We give life to dead land. This is how the resurrection will be. Before them, the people of Noah, the companions of the Rass, and the Thamud denied the truth. So did the 'Ad, Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot, as well as the companions of the Wood and the people of Tubba'. Each of them rejected the messengers, and My warning was fulfilled in them.

Were We tired from the first creation? Yet they doubt a new creation. We created man and know what his soul whispers to him; We are closer to him than his jugular vein. Two guardian angels record his deeds, one on the right and one on the left. Not a word does he utter without a sentinel ready to note it. The stupor of death will bring the truth before his eyes: "This is what you were trying to escape!"

The trumpet will be blown, marking the Day of Warning. Every soul will come forth with an angel to drive and an angel to bear witness. It will be said, "You were heedless of this; now We have removed your veil, and your sight is sharp today!" His companion will say, "Here is his record ready with me!" It will be commanded, "Throw into Hell every stubborn rejecter of God, who forbade good, transgressed all bounds, and cast doubts."

His companion will say, "Our Lord! I did not make him transgress, but he was far astray." God will say, "Do not dispute in My presence; I had already sent you warning. My word does not change, and I am not unjust to My servants." On that day, Hell will be asked, "Are you filled?" and it will say, "Are there any more?"

The Garden will be brought near to the righteous, no longer distant. It will be said, "This is what you were promised, for every penitent and heedful one who feared God unseen and brought a devoted heart. Enter in peace; this is the day of immortality." They will have all they desire, and more besides in Our presence.

How many generations before them did We destroy, who were stronger in power? They wandered through the land, but was there any place of escape? Indeed, in this is a message for anyone with a heart and understanding or who listens and witnesses the truth. We created the heavens and the earth and all between them in six days, and We were not tired.We created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six days, without any fatigue. So, be patient with what they say and praise your Lord before sunrise and sunset. Also, praise Him during part of the night and after your prayers.

Listen for the Day when the Caller will call out from a nearby place. On that Day, they will hear a mighty blast, marking the Day of Resurrection. We are the ones who give life and death, and to Us is the final return. On that Day, the earth will split open, and people will rush out. This gathering is easy for Us.

We know best what they say, and you are not to force them. So, remind them with the Qur'an, those who fear My warning.

Chapter 51: ADH-DHARIYAT (THE WINNOWING WINDS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

By the winds that scatter far and wide, and those that carry heavy loads, and those that flow with ease and gentleness, and those that distribute blessings by command. What you are promised is true, and judgment will indeed come to pass.

By the sky with its numerous paths, you are in a state of discord. Those who are averse are turned away from the truth. Woe to the liars who are heedless in confusion. They ask, "When is the Day of Judgment?" It is the day when they will be tormented by the Fire. They will be told, "Taste your torment; this is what you sought to hasten."

As for the righteous, they will be in gardens and springs, taking joy in what their Lord gives them because they lived a good life before. They used to sleep little at night and seek forgiveness at dawn. In their wealth, there was a portion for the needy and the deprived.

On the earth are signs for those with assured faith, and in yourselves. Will you not see? In the heaven is your sustenance and what you are promised. By the Lord of heaven and earth, it is the truth, just as you speak.

Has the story of Abraham's honored guests reached you? They entered his presence and said, "Peace!" He replied, "Peace!" and thought they were unusual people. He quickly went to his household and brought out a fatted calf, placing it before them. He said, "Will you not eat?" When they did not eat, he felt fear. They said, "Fear not," and gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge.

His wife came forward laughing aloud, smote her forehead, and said, "A barren old woman!" They said, "Even so has your Lord spoken; He is full of Wisdom and Knowledge." Abraham asked, "What is your errand, O Messengers?" They replied, "We have been sent to a sinful people, to bring upon them a shower of stones of clay, marked by your Lord for those who trespass beyond bounds."

Then We evacuated the believers who were there, but We found no just persons except...In one house, we found only one family that had submitted to God. We left a sign there for those who fear a severe punishment. 

In Moses, there was another sign: We sent him to Pharaoh with clear authority, but Pharaoh turned away with his chiefs, calling Moses a sorcerer or madman. So, We seized Pharaoh and his forces and threw them into the sea because they were blameworthy.

In the people of 'Ad, there was a sign when We sent a devastating wind against them. It left nothing it touched but reduced it to ruin. Similarly, in the people of Thamud, they were told to enjoy themselves for a while, but they defied their Lord's command, and a thunderbolt overtook them while they watched. They couldn't stand or help themselves.

The people of Noah before them also transgressed. We built the heavens with power and spread out the earth excellently. We created everything in pairs so that you might reflect. So, hasten to God; I am a clear warner to you from Him. Do not set up any other god with God; I am a clear warner to you from Him.

No messenger came to the people before them without being called a sorcerer or madman. They are a transgressing people. So, turn away from them; you are not to blame. But continue to remind them, for the reminder benefits the believers. 

I created jinn and humans only to worship Me. I do not require sustenance from them, nor do I need them to feed Me. God is the Provider, the Lord of Power. For the wrongdoers, their portion is like that of their predecessors. Woe to the disbelievers on the Day they are promised.

Chapter 52: AT-TUR (THE MOUNT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

By the Mount, by a decree inscribed in a scroll unfolded, by the much-frequented House, by the elevated canopy, and by the ocean filled with swell, the doom of your Lord will indeed come to pass. No one can avert it. On the Day when the sky will be in dreadful commotion and the mountains will move, woe to those who deny the truth. They will be thrust into the Fire of Hell and told, "This is the Fire you used to deny. Is this magic, or do you not see? Enter it, whether you are patient or not; you are only being repaid for what you did."

As for the righteous, they will be in gardens and happiness, enjoying what their Lord has given them and saved from the penalty of the Fire. They will be told, "Eat and drink with profit and health because of your good deeds.""Eat and drink in good health as a reward for your deeds." They will recline on dignified thrones, and We will join them with companions with beautiful, big, and lustrous eyes. Those who believe and whose families follow them in faith will be reunited with their families, and none of their good deeds will be diminished. Each person is accountable for their actions.

We will provide them with fruits and meats of their choice. They will exchange cups of drink that are free from frivolity and sin. Young male servants, as beautiful as hidden pearls, will serve them. They will converse with each other, saying, "We used to be anxious for our families, but God has been gracious to us and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind. We used to call upon Him before; truly, He is the Beneficent, the Merciful."

Therefore, proclaim the praises of your Lord. By the grace of your Lord, you are neither a soothsayer nor mad. Do they say, "He is a poet, and we await some calamity for him"? Say, "Wait, for I too am waiting with you." Do their minds command them to do this, or are they a transgressing people? Do they say, "He fabricated the message"? No, they do not believe. Let them produce a message like it if they are truthful.

Were they created from nothing, or are they their own creators? Did they create the heavens and the earth? No, they have no firm belief. Do they possess the treasures of your Lord, or are they in charge? Do they have a ladder to heaven to listen to its secrets? Let their listener produce clear proof. Does God have daughters while they have sons? Do you ask them for a reward, burdening them with debt? Do they possess the unseen so they can write it down? Do they plot against you? Those who defy God are themselves involved in a plot.

Do they have a god other than God? Exalted is God above what they associate with Him. If they saw a piece of the sky falling, they would say, "Clouds gathered in heaps." Leave them until they encounter their Day, wherein they will swoon with terror. On that Day, their plotting will avail them nothing, and they will receive no help. For those who do wrong, there is another punishment besides this, but most of them do not understand.

Wait patiently for your Lord's command, for you are under Our watchful eye. Celebrate the praises of your Lord while you stand, and at night, and at the retreat of the stars.

Chapter 53: AN-NAJM (THE STAR)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

By the star when it goes down, your companion is neither astray nor misled. He does not speak from his own desire. It is an inspiration sent down to him, taught by one mighty in power, endowed with wisdom. He appeared in stately form while he was in the highest part of the horizon. Then he approached and came closer.He bowed and was at a distance of two bow-lengths or even closer. God conveyed the inspiration to His servant, revealing what He intended. The Prophet's heart did not deny what he saw. Will you then argue with him about what he saw? Indeed, he saw him again at another descent, near the Lote-tree beyond which none may pass. Near it is the Garden of Abode. The Lote-tree was shrouded in mystery. His sight did not swerve nor go wrong. Truly, he saw one of the greatest signs of his Lord.

Have you considered the deities Lat, Uzza, and the third, Manat? Do you think you get the male offspring and God gets the female? This is an unfair division. These are just names you and your ancestors have invented, for which God has sent no authority. They follow nothing but conjecture and their own desires, even though guidance has come to them from their Lord. Can man have whatever he desires? No, to God belongs the beginning and the end of all things.

How many angels are in the heavens whose intercession is of no use except after God permits it for whom He wills and is pleased with? Those who do not believe in the Hereafter name the angels with female names. They have no knowledge of this; they follow only conjecture, and conjecture is no substitute for the truth. So, avoid those who turn away from Our message and desire only the life of this world. That is the extent of their knowledge. Your Lord knows best who strays from His path and who is rightly guided.

To God belongs everything in the heavens and on earth, so He may reward those who do evil according to their deeds and those who do good with what is best. Those who avoid major sins and shameful deeds, only falling into small faults, will find their Lord ample in forgiveness. He knows you well when He brings you out of the earth and when you are hidden in your mothers' wombs. Do not justify yourselves; He knows best who guards against evil.

Have you seen the one who turns back, gives a little, and then withholds? Does he have knowledge of the unseen so he can see? Has he not been informed of what is in the scriptures of Moses and Abraham, who fulfilled his engagements? That no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another, and that man can have nothing but what he strives for. The fruit of his striving will soon be in sight, and he will be rewarded with a complete reward. To your Lord is the final goal.

It is He who grants laughter and tears, death and life, and creates in pairs, male and female, from a seed when lodged in its place. He has promised a second creation (raising of the dead). It is He who gives wealth and satisfaction and is the Lord of Sirius (the mighty star). He destroyed the powerful ancient 'Ad people and the Thamud, giving them no lease of perpetual life.The Thamud people were not spared either. Before them, the people of Noah were also unjust and rebellious. They denied our servant, calling him mad, and he was driven away. When he called upon his Lord for help, we opened the gates of heaven with pouring water and caused the earth to gush forth with springs. The waters met for a predestined purpose, and we carried Noah on an ark made of planks and nails, which sailed under our watchful eyes as a reward for him who was rejected. We left this as a sign, but is there anyone who will take heed?

How terrible was My punishment and My warning! We have indeed made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember, but is there anyone who will receive admonition? The 'Ad people also rejected the truth, and we sent a furious wind on a day of violent disaster, plucking out men as if they were roots of palm trees torn up. How terrible was My punishment and My warning!

The Thamud people also rejected their warners, saying, "What! A man, a solitary one from among ourselves! Shall we follow such a one? Truly, we would be straying in mind and mad!" They claimed the message was sent to him alone among them, calling him a liar and insolent. They will know on the morrow who is the liar and insolent one.

We sent the she-camel as a trial for them, instructing Salih to watch them and be patient. The water was to be divided between them, each one's right to drink being brought forward by suitable turns. But they called their companion, who took a sword and hamstrung her. How terrible was My punishment and My warning! We sent a single mighty blast against them, and they became like dry stubble used by one who pens cattle.The people of Lot also ignored the warnings. We sent a violent storm with showers of stones against them, sparing only Lot's household, whom we saved at dawn. This was a favor from us, as we reward those who are grateful. Lot had warned them of our punishment, but they doubted him. They even tried to harm his guests, so we blinded their eyes and said, "Taste my wrath and warning." The punishment struck them early in the morning, and they were told, "Taste my wrath and warning."

We have indeed made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember, but is there anyone who will take heed? The people of Pharaoh also received warnings, but they rejected all our signs. So, we seized them with a mighty punishment. Are your disbelievers better than those, or do you have some immunity in the scriptures? Do they think they can defend themselves? Soon their multitude will be put to flight, and they will turn and flee. The Hour of Judgment is their appointed time, and it will be most grievous and bitter. The guilty are in error and madness. On the day they are dragged into the fire on their faces, they will be told, "Taste the touch of hell."

We have created everything in proportion and measure. Our command is but a single act, like the twinkling of an eye. We have destroyed many like you before; is there anyone who will take heed? Everything they did is recorded in the scriptures. Every small and great thing is written down. The righteous will dwell among gardens and rivers, in an assembly of truth, in the presence of a Sovereign Omnipotent.

Chapter 55: AR-RAHMAN (THE BENEFICENT, THE MERCY GIVING)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

God, the Most Gracious, has taught the Qur'an. He created man and taught him speech and intelligence. The sun and the moon follow courses exactly computed. The stars and the trees prostrate in adoration. He raised the firmament high and set up the balance of justice so that you may not transgress it. Establish weight with justice and do not fall short in the balance. He spread out the earth for His creatures, with fruits, date-palms, corn, and sweet-smelling plants. Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?

He created man from sounding clay like pottery and jinns from smokeless fire. Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? He is the Lord of the two Easts and the two Wests. He has let free the two bodies of flowing water, meeting together, with a barrier between them that they do not transgress. Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? Out of them come pearls and coral. Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? His are the ships sailing smoothly through the seas, lofty as mountains.In the sea, like banners. And His are the ships raised high in the sea like mountains. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Everything on earth will perish, but the face of your Lord, full of Majesty, Bounty, and Honor, will remain forever. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Every creature in the heavens and on earth seeks Him; every day He is in a new state of glory. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Soon, We will settle your affairs, O both worlds (man and jinn). 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

O assembly of jinn and men! If you can pass beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth, then pass! But you will not pass except with authority. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

On you will be sent a flame of fire and smoke, and you will have no defense. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

When the sky is rent asunder and becomes red like ointment. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

On that day, neither man nor jinn will be questioned about his sin. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

The guilty will be known by their marks and will be seized by their forelocks and their feet. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

This is the Hell which the sinners deny. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

In its midst and in the midst of boiling hot water, they will wander around. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

But for those who fear the time when they will stand before their Lord, there will be two Gardens. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Containing all kinds of trees and delights. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

In them will be two springs flowing freely. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

In them will be fruits of every kind, in pairs. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

They will recline on carpets, whose inner linings will be of rich brocade; the fruit of the gardens will be near and easy to reach. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

In them will be maidens, chaste, restraining their glances, whom no man or jinn before them has touched. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Like rubies and coral. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Is there any reward for good other than good? 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

And besides these two, there are two other Gardens. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Dark-green in color from plentiful watering. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

In them will be two springs pouring forth water in continuous abundance. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

In them will be fruits, dates, and pomegranates. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

In them will be fair companions, good and beautiful. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Companions restrained as to their glances, in goodly pavilions. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny? 

Whom no man or jinn before them has touched.Neither man nor jinn has touched them before. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?

They will recline on green cushions and beautiful carpets. 

Which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?

Blessed be the name of your Lord, full of Majesty, Bounty, and Honor.

Chapter 56: AL-WAQIA (THE INEVITABLE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

When the inevitable event happens, no one will deny its occurrence. It will bring some low and raise others high. When the earth is shaken to its core and the mountains crumble to dust, you will be divided into three groups: the companions of the right hand, the companions of the left hand, and those foremost in faith.

The companions of the right hand—how blessed they are! They will be among thornless lote-trees, clustered plantains, extended shade, flowing water, and abundant fruit. They will sit on raised thrones, created anew as pure and loving companions, equal in age.

A large number from the past and a good number from later times will be among them.

The companions of the left hand—how miserable they are! They will be in scorching wind, boiling water, and the shade of black smoke, neither cool nor refreshing. They indulged in luxury and persisted in great sin, denying resurrection after death.

They will be gathered for a well-known day. Then, you who go astray and deny the truth will eat from the tree of Zaqqum, filling your bellies and drinking boiling water like thirsty camels. This will be their entertainment on the Day of Requital.

We created you; why do you not believe? Have you considered the seed you emit? Do you create it, or are We the Creator?Is it you who create it, or are We the creators? We have decreed death as your common fate, and We cannot be thwarted. We determine death among you, and We cannot be outrun. We can change your forms and create you again in ways you do not know. You already know the first creation, so why do you not reflect and celebrate His praises?

Have you considered the seed you sow in the ground? Is it you who make it grow, or are We the cause? If We willed, We could turn it into dry powder, and you would be left in wonderment, saying, "We are indeed left with debts for nothing," or "We are deprived."

Have you considered the water you drink? Is it you who bring it down from the clouds, or do We? If We willed, We could make it salty; why then do you not give thanks?

Have you considered the fire you kindle? Is it you who grow the tree that feeds the fire, or do We? We have made it a reminder and a comfort for the dwellers in the wilderness. So, praise the name of your Lord, the Supreme.

I call to witness the setting of the stars, and that is indeed a mighty oath if you but knew. This is indeed a noble Qur'an, in a well-guarded Book, which none shall touch but those who are clean. It is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds. Is this a message you would hold in light esteem and declare false?

Why do you not intervene when the soul of the dying man reaches the throat, while you sit looking on? We are nearer to him than you, but you do not see. If you are exempt from future account, call back the soul if you are true in your claim of independence.

If he is one of those nearest to God, there is for him rest and satisfaction, and a Garden of Delights. If he is one of the companions of the right hand, he will be greeted with "Peace be unto thee" from the companions of the right hand. But if he is one of those who treat the truth as falsehood and go wrong, his entertainment will be boiling water and burning in Hell-Fire. This is the certain truth. So, praise the name of your Lord, the Supreme.

Chapter 57: AL-HADID (THE IRON)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares the praises and glory of God, for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise. To Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and death, and He has power over all things. He is the First and the Last, the Evident and the Immanent, and He has full knowledge of all things.

He created the heavens and the earth in six days and is firmly established on the Throne of Authority. He knows what enters the earth and what comes forth from it, what comes down from heaven and what ascends to it. He is with you wherever you are, and God sees well all that you do.

To Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all affairs are referred back to God. He merges night into day and day into night, and He has full knowledge of the secrets of all hearts.

Believe in God and His messenger, and spend in charity out of what He has made you heirs. For those who believe and spend in charity, there is a great reward.Why don't you believe in God when the Messenger invites you to believe in your Lord? He has already made a covenant with you if you are true believers. God sends clear signs to His servant to lead you from darkness into light. He is kind and merciful to you.

Why don't you spend in the cause of God? Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. Those who spent and fought before the victory are higher in rank than those who did so later, but God has promised good to all. He knows everything you do.

Who will lend to God a good loan? He will multiply it for you and give you a generous reward. On the Day of Judgment, you will see believing men and women with their light shining before them. They will be told, "Good news for you today! Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where you will live forever. This is the highest achievement."

On that day, hypocrites will ask believers to share their light, but they will be told to go back and seek their own light. A wall with a gate will separate them, with mercy inside and punishment outside. The hypocrites will call out, "Weren't we with you?" The believers will reply, "Yes, but you led yourselves into temptation, doubted, and were deceived by false desires until God's command came."

No ransom will be accepted from you or those who rejected God. Your home is the Fire, and it is an evil refuge. Isn't it time for believers to humble their hearts in remembrance of God and the truth revealed to them? Don't be like those who received the scripture before but let their hearts harden over time.

Know that God gives life to the earth after its death. We have made the signs clear to you so you may understand. Those who give in charity and lend to God a good loan will have it doubled and receive a noble reward. Believers in God and His messengers are the truthful and faithful ones. They will have their reward and light, while those who disbelieve will be in Hell.

Understand that the life of this world is just play, amusement, and rivalry in wealth and children. It's like rain that makes vegetation grow, which then withers and turns yellow. In the Hereafter, there is severe punishment for wrongdoers and forgiveness and pleasure from God for the righteous. The life of this world is just an illusion.Rain makes plants grow, which pleases farmers, but then the plants wither, turn yellow, and dry up. In the Hereafter, there is severe punishment and also forgiveness and pleasure from God. This world's life is just a deception.

Strive for forgiveness from your Lord and a Garden as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who believe in God and His messengers. This is God's grace, which He gives to whom He pleases. God is the Lord of abundant grace.

No misfortune happens on earth or in yourselves without it being recorded in a decree before We bring it into existence. This is easy for God. This is so you don't despair over what you miss or boast about what you receive. God does not love the arrogant and boastful.

Those who are stingy and encourage others to be stingy should know that God is free of all needs and worthy of all praise. We sent our messengers with clear signs and sent down the Book and the Balance so that people may act justly. We also sent down iron, which has great power and benefits for humanity, so that God may test who will help Him and His messengers, even though unseen. God is Strong and Mighty.

We sent Noah and Abraham and established prophethood and revelation in their lineage. Some of them were rightly guided, but many were rebellious. After them, We sent other messengers, including Jesus, son of Mary, and gave him the Gospel. We placed compassion and mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. However, monasticism was their own invention; We did not prescribe it for them. They sought God's pleasure but did not observe it properly. We gave those who believed their reward, but many were rebellious.

Believers, fear God and believe in His Messenger. He will give you a double portion of His mercy, provide you with a light to walk by, and forgive you. God is Forgiving and Merciful. This is so that the People of the Book may know they have no control over God's grace, which is entirely in His hand to bestow on whom He wills. God is the Lord of abundant grace.

Chapter 58: AL-MUJADILA (THE PLEADING WOMAN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

God has heard the statement of the woman who pleads with you about her husband and complains to God. God hears your arguments. God is Hearing and Seeing.

If any men among you divorce their wives by calling them mothers, they are not their mothers. Their mothers are only those who gave them birth. They utter an iniquitous and false word. But God is one who blots out sins and forgives repeatedly.

Those who divorce their wives by calling them mothers and then wish to go back on their words must free a slave before they touch each other. This is what you are admonished to do. God is well aware of what you do.

If they cannot afford it, they should fast for two consecutive months before they touch each other. If they are unable to do so, they should feed sixty needy people. This is to show your faith in God and His Messenger. These are the limits set by God. For those who reject Him, there is a grievous penalty.If someone can't afford to free a slave, they should fast for two consecutive months before they can be intimate again. If they can't do that either, they should feed sixty needy people. This is to show your faith in God and His Messenger. These are God's rules, and those who reject them will face severe punishment.

Those who oppose God and His Messenger will be humbled, just like those before them. We have sent clear signs, and disbelievers will face a humiliating penalty.

On the Day of Judgment, God will raise everyone and show them the truth of their actions. God has kept a record, even if they have forgotten. God is a witness to everything.

Don't you see that God knows everything in the heavens and on earth? There is no secret conversation among three people without God being the fourth, nor among five without Him being the sixth. He is with them wherever they are, and on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did. God knows all things.

Have you noticed those who were forbidden secret meetings but still return to them, conspiring for sin and disobedience to the Messenger? When they come to you, they greet you in a way God does not approve of and say to themselves, "Why doesn't God punish us for what we say?" Hell is enough for them; they will burn in it, and it's a terrible destination.

Believers, when you hold secret meetings, don't do it for sin and hostility and disobedience to the Prophet. Instead, do it for righteousness and self-restraint, and fear God, to whom you will be brought back.

Secret meetings are only inspired by the devil to cause grief to the believers, but he can't harm them without God's permission. Believers should put their trust in God.

Believers, when you are told to make room in assemblies, make room; God will make room for you. When you are told to rise, rise; God will raise those who believe and have knowledge to high ranks. God is aware of what you do.

Believers, when you consult the Messenger in private, spend something in charity before your consultation. This is better and purer for you. But if you can't afford it, God is Forgiving and Merciful.

Are you afraid of spending in charity before your private consultation? If you don't do it and God forgives you, then at least establish regular prayer, practice regular charity, and obey God and His Messenger. God is aware of what you do.

Have you seen those who befriend people with whom God is angry? They are neither of you nor of them, and they swear falsely while knowing it.

God has prepared a severe punishment for them. Their deeds are evil.

They use their oaths as a cover for their misdeeds and obstruct people from the path of God. They will face a humiliating penalty.

Their wealth and children will not benefit them against God. They are the companions of the Fire, where they will dwell forever.

One day, God will raise them all for judgment. They will swear to Him as they swear to you, thinking they have something to stand on. No, indeed!On the Day of Judgment, God will gather everyone, and they will swear to Him just as they swear to you now, thinking they have some standing. But they are indeed the liars. The devil has taken control of them, making them forget to remember God. They are part of the devil's group, and it is the devil's group that will lose.

Those who oppose God and His Messenger will be among the most humiliated. God has decreed that He and His messengers will prevail, for God is strong and mighty. You will not find people who believe in God and the Last Day befriending those who oppose God and His Messenger, even if they are their fathers, sons, brothers, or relatives. God has written faith in their hearts and strengthened them with a spirit from Himself. He will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will live forever. God is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. They are the party of God, and it is the party of God that will succeed.

Chapter 59: AL-HASHR (EXILE, BANISHMENT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares the praises and glory of God, for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise. It is He who expelled the disbelievers among the People of the Book from their homes at the first gathering. You did not think they would leave, and they thought their fortresses would protect them from God. But God's wrath came upon them from where they did not expect, and He cast terror into their hearts, so they destroyed their homes with their own hands and the hands of the believers. Take warning, O you who have eyes to see!

If God had not decreed their exile, He would have punished them in this world, and in the Hereafter, they will have the punishment of the Fire. This is because they opposed God and His Messenger, and whoever opposes God will face severe punishment. Whether you cut down the tender palm trees or leave them standing, it was by God's permission, so that He might disgrace the rebellious transgressors.

What God has bestowed on His Messenger from them, you did not press forward against it with any horse or riding camel, but God gives authority to His messengers over whom He pleases. God has power over all things. What God has given to His Messenger from the people of the towns belongs to God, His Messenger, and to kindred, orphans, the needy, and the wayfarer, so that it does not circulate only among the wealthy. So take what the Messenger assigns to you and abstain from what he forbids you. Fear God, for God is strict in punishment.

Some part is due to the indigent Muhajirs, those who were expelled from their homes and their property while seeking grace from God and His good pleasure, and aiding God and His Messenger. They are indeed the sincere ones. Those who had homes in Medina and had adopted the faith before them show their affection to those who came to them for refuge. They entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to the latter but give them preference over themselves, even though they are in poverty. Those who are saved from the covetousness of their own souls are the ones who achieve prosperity.Those who came into the faith later say, "Our Lord, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in faith. Do not let any resentment remain in our hearts towards those who believe. Our Lord, You are indeed Kind and Merciful."

Have you not seen the hypocrites say to their disbelieving brethren among the People of the Book, "If you are expelled, we will go out with you and never listen to anyone against you. If you are attacked, we will help you." But God bears witness that they are liars. If they are expelled, they will not go out with them, and if they are attacked, they will not help them. Even if they did help, they would turn and flee, receiving no help.

You are more feared in their hearts than God because they are people who do not understand. They will not fight you together except in fortified towns or from behind walls. Their internal fighting is severe; you may think they are united, but their hearts are divided because they lack wisdom.

They are like those who recently tasted the evil consequences of their actions and will face a painful punishment in the Hereafter. Their allies deceived them, like the devil who says to man, "Deny God." But when man denies, the devil says, "I am free of you; I fear God, the Lord of the Worlds." The end for both will be the Fire, where they will dwell forever. Such is the reward for wrongdoers.

O believers, fear God and let every soul consider what it has prepared for tomorrow. Fear God, for He is well-acquainted with all that you do. Do not be like those who forgot God, causing them to forget their own souls. They are the rebellious transgressors. The companions of the Fire and the companions of the Garden are not equal. The companions of the Garden are the successful ones.

If We had sent down this Qur'an on a mountain, you would have seen it humble itself and split asunder for fear of God. These are the parables We set forth for people so they may reflect. God is He, besides whom there is no other god. He knows all things, both secret and open. He is the Most Gracious, Most Merciful. He is God, the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source of Peace, the Guardian of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the Supreme. Glory to God, above the partners they attribute to Him.

He is God, the Creator, the Evolver, the Bestower of Forms. To Him belong the most beautiful names. Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares His praises and glory. He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

Chapter 60: AL-MUMTAHINA (SHE THAT IS TO BE EXAMINED)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

O believers, do not take My enemies and yours as friends, offering them love even though they have rejected the truth that has come to you and have driven out the Prophet and yourselves from your homes simply because you believe in God, your Lord. If you have come out to strive in My way and seek My good pleasure, do not take them as friends, holding secret conversations of love with them. I know all that you conceal and reveal. Any of you who does this has strayed from the Straight Path.O believers, do not take My enemies and yours as friends, offering them love even though they have rejected the truth that has come to you and have driven out the Prophet and yourselves from your homes simply because you believe in God, your Lord. If you have come out to strive in My way and seek My good pleasure, do not take them as friends, holding secret conversations of love with them. I know all that you conceal and reveal. Any of you who does this has strayed from the Straight Path.

If they gain the upper hand over you, they will act as enemies and harm you with their hands and tongues, wishing you to disbelieve. Your relatives and children will not benefit you on the Day of Judgment. God will judge between you, and He sees everything you do.

You have a good example in Abraham and those with him when they said to their people, "We are clear of you and what you worship besides God. We reject you, and enmity and hatred have arisen between us and you forever until you believe in God alone." But Abraham said to his father, "I will pray for your forgiveness, though I have no power to get anything on your behalf from God." They prayed, "Our Lord, in You we trust, and to You we turn in repentance. To You is our final goal."

Our Lord, do not make us a trial for the disbelievers, and forgive us. You are the Mighty, the Wise. There is a good example for you in them for those who hope in God and the Last Day. But if anyone turns away, God is Free of all needs, Worthy of all praise.

It may be that God will create love between you and those you now hold as enemies. God is Powerful, and He is Forgiving, Merciful. God does not forbid you from being kind and just to those who do not fight you for your faith or drive you out of your homes. God loves those who are just.

God only forbids you from making friends with those who fight you for your faith, drive you out of your homes, and support others in driving you out. Whoever makes friends with them is a wrongdoer.

O believers, when believing women come to you as refugees, test them. God knows best their faith. If you find them to be believers, do not send them back to the disbelievers. They are not lawful for the disbelievers, nor are the disbelievers lawful for them. Give the disbelievers what they have spent on them. There is no blame on you if you marry them after giving them their dowries. Do not hold on to the guardianship of disbelieving women. Ask for what you have spent, and let the disbelievers ask for what they have spent. This is God's judgment. He judges between you, and God is Knowing, Wise.

If any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers, and you gain something in return, then pay those whose wives have deserted the equivalent of what they had spent. Fear God, in whom you believe.

O Prophet, when believing women come to you to take the oath of allegiance, that they will not associate anything with God, that they will not steal, commit adultery, kill their children, utter slander, or disobey you in any just matter, then accept their allegiance and pray to God for their forgiveness. God is Forgiving, Merciful."O believers, when women who believe come to you seeking refuge, test their faith. God knows best their belief. If you find them to be true believers, do not send them back to the disbelievers. They are not lawful for the disbelievers, nor are the disbelievers lawful for them. Return to the disbelievers what they have spent on them. There is no blame on you if you marry them after giving them their dowries. Do not hold onto the guardianship of disbelieving women. Ask for what you have spent, and let the disbelievers ask for what they have spent. This is God's judgment. He judges between you, and God is Knowing, Wise.

If any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers, and you gain something in return, then pay those whose wives have deserted the equivalent of what they had spent. Fear God, in whom you believe.

O Prophet, when believing women come to you to take the oath of allegiance, that they will not associate anything with God, that they will not steal, commit adultery, kill their children, utter slander, or disobey you in any just matter, then accept their allegiance and pray to God for their forgiveness. God is Forgiving, Merciful.

O believers, do not befriend people with whom God is angry. They have despaired of the Hereafter just as the disbelievers have despaired of those buried in graves.

Chapter 61: AS-SAFF (THE RANKS, BATTLE ARRAY)
In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares the glory of God. He is the Mighty, the Wise.

O believers, why do you say what you do not do? It is most hateful in the sight of God that you say what you do not do. Truly, God loves those who fight in His cause in ranks, as if they were a solid structure.

Remember when Moses said to his people, "O my people! Why do you vex and insult me, though you know that I am the messenger of God sent to you?" When they went wrong, God let their hearts go wrong. God does not guide those who are rebellious transgressors.

And remember, Jesus, the son of Mary, said, "O Children of Israel! I am the messenger of God sent to you, confirming the Law which came before me, and giving glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad." But when he came to them with clear signs, they said, "This is evident sorcery!"

Who does greater wrong than one who invents falsehood against God, even as he is being invited to Islam? God does not guide those who do wrong.

Their intention is to extinguish God's Light with their mouths, but God will complete His Light, even though the disbelievers may detest it. He is the One who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, to proclaim it over all religion, even though the pagans may detest it.

O believers, shall I lead you to a bargain that will save you from a grievous penalty? Believe in God and His Messenger, and strive in the cause of God with your property and your persons. That will be best for you if you but knew! He will forgive your sins and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow, and to beautiful mansions in gardens of eternity. That is indeed the supreme achievement. And another favor which you love: help from God and a speedy victory. So give the glad tidings to the believers.

O believers, be helpers of God, as Jesus the son of Mary said to the disciples, "Who will be my helpers in the cause of God?" The disciples said, "We are God's helpers!" Then a portion of the Children of Israel believed, and a portion disbelieved. But We gave power to those who believed against their enemies, and they became the ones who prevailed.

Chapter 62: AL-JUMUA (THE CONGREGATION, FRIDAY)
In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares the glory of God, the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Exalted in Might, the Wise. He is the One who has sent among the unlettered a messenger from among themselves, to recite to them His signs, to sanctify them, and to instruct them in Scripture and Wisdom, although they had been, before, in manifest error. Along with others of them who have not yet joined them. He is the Mighty, the Wise."He is the Mighty, the Wise. This is the bounty of God, which He bestows on whom He wills. God is the Lord of infinite bounty.

The example of those who were given the Mosaic Law but failed to uphold it is like a donkey carrying books—it doesn't understand their value. Evil is the example of people who deny God's signs, and God does not guide wrongdoers.

Say, "O Jews, if you claim to be God's chosen people to the exclusion of others, then wish for death if you are truthful." But they will never wish for it because of what their hands have done. God knows well those who do wrong.

Say, "The death you flee from will surely overtake you. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of what you used to do."

O believers, when the call to prayer is made on Friday, hasten to the remembrance of God and leave off business. That is better for you if you only knew. When the prayer is finished, disperse in the land and seek God's bounty, and remember God often so that you may prosper.

But when they see some bargain or amusement, they rush to it and leave you standing. Say, "What is with God is better than amusement and merchandise, and God is the best provider."

Chapter 63: The Hypocrites

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

When the hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of God." God knows that you are His Messenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are liars.

They use their oaths as a cover and turn people away from the path of God. Truly evil are their deeds. This is because they believed and then disbelieved, so their hearts were sealed, and they do not understand.

When you see them, their appearance pleases you, and when they speak, you listen to their words. They are like hollow pieces of timber propped up. They think every shout is against them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. May God curse them! How are they deluded away from the truth!

When it is said to them, "Come, the Messenger of God will pray for your forgiveness," they turn their heads aside, and you see them turning away in arrogance. It is the same whether you ask forgiveness for them or not; God will not forgive them. God does not guide rebellious transgressors.

They are the ones who say, "Do not spend on those who are with God's Messenger until they disperse." But to God belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, yet the hypocrites do not understand. They say, "If we return to Medina, the more honorable will expel the meaner." But honor belongs to God, His Messenger, and the believers, though the hypocrites do not know.

O believers, do not let your wealth or your children distract you from the remembrance of God. Those who do so are the losers. Spend in charity from what We have provided you before death comes to any of you, and he says, "My Lord, why did You not give me respite for a little while? I would have given in charity and been among the righteous.""Spend from what We have provided you before death comes to one of you, and he says, 'My Lord, if only You would delay me for a little while, I would give in charity and be among the righteous.' But God will not delay a soul when its time has come, and God is fully aware of what you do.

Chapter 64: Mutual Disillusion (At-Taghabun)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

Everything in the heavens and on earth glorifies God. To Him belongs all dominion and praise, and He has power over all things. He created you, and among you are those who believe and those who do not. God sees everything you do. He created the heavens and the earth with truth and shaped you beautifully. To Him is your final return. He knows what is in the heavens and on earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. God knows the secrets of all hearts.

Have you not heard the story of those who rejected faith before? They tasted the consequences of their actions and faced a grievous penalty. This happened because messengers came to them with clear signs, but they said, 'Shall mere humans guide us?' So they disbelieved and turned away. God is independent of them and worthy of all praise.

Those who disbelieve think they will not be raised up for judgment. Say, 'Yes, by my Lord, you will surely be raised up and informed of what you did. That is easy for God.' So believe in God and His Messenger and the light We have revealed. God is fully aware of what you do.

On the Day He gathers you for the Day of Assembly, it will be a day of mutual loss and gain. Those who believe in God and do righteous deeds will have their sins removed and will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell there forever. That is the supreme achievement. But those who reject faith and deny Our signs will be companions of the Fire, to dwell there forever. What an evil destination!

No calamity occurs except by God's permission. Whoever believes in God, He guides their heart. God knows all things. So obey God and His Messenger. If you turn away, the duty of Our Messenger is only to convey the message clearly. God, there is no god but He. Let the believers put their trust in God.

O believers, among your spouses and children are enemies to you, so beware of them. But if you forgive, overlook, and pardon, then God is Forgiving, Merciful. Your wealth and children are only a test, but with God is a great reward. So be mindful of God as much as you can, listen, obey, and spend in charity. Whoever is saved from their own greed will be successful. If you lend to God a goodly loan, He will double it for you and forgive you. God is most appreciative and forbearing, knowing the unseen and the seen, the Mighty, the Wise.

Chapter 65: Divorce (At-Talaq)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

O Prophet, when you divorce women, divorce them at the appropriate time..."When you divorce women, do so at the appropriate time and accurately count their waiting period. Fear God, your Lord, and do not force them out of their homes, nor should they leave unless they commit clear immorality. These are the limits set by God, and whoever transgresses them wrongs their own soul. You do not know if God might bring about a new situation afterward.

When they have fulfilled their waiting period, either take them back on fair terms or part with them on fair terms. Call two just witnesses from among you and establish the testimony before God. This is the advice for those who believe in God and the Last Day. Whoever fears God, He will make a way out for them and provide for them from sources they could never imagine. Whoever trusts in God, He is sufficient for them. God will accomplish His purpose, for He has set a measure for all things.

For women who have passed the age of menstruation, their waiting period is three months if you have any doubts. The same applies to those who have not menstruated. For pregnant women, their waiting period is until they deliver their burden. Whoever fears God, He will make their path easy.

This is the command of God, which He has sent down to you. Whoever fears God, He will remove their ills and enlarge their reward. Let the women live in the same style as you live, according to your means. Do not annoy them to restrict them. If they are pregnant, spend on them until they deliver. If they suckle your child, give them their due payment and consult together in kindness. If you face difficulties, let another woman suckle the child.

Let the man of means spend according to his means, and the one with limited resources spend according to what God has given him. God does not burden any soul beyond what He has given it. After difficulty, God will soon grant relief.

Many communities that opposed the command of their Lord and His messengers were called to account and faced severe punishment. They tasted the evil result of their conduct, and their end was perdition. God has prepared a severe punishment for them. Therefore, fear God, O people of understanding who believe! God has indeed sent down a reminder to you.

A Messenger recites to you the clear signs of God to lead those who believe and do righteous deeds from darkness into light. Those who believe in God and do good deeds will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell there forever. God has indeed granted them excellent provision.

God is the One who created seven heavens and a similar number of earths. His command descends among them so that you may know that God has power over all things and that He comprehends all things in His knowledge."O Prophet! Why do you forbid yourself from what God has made lawful for you, seeking to please your wives? God is Forgiving and Merciful. God has already allowed you to dissolve certain oaths. He is your Protector, full of Knowledge and Wisdom.

When the Prophet confided a matter to one of his wives, and she disclosed it, God informed him. He confirmed part of it and ignored part. When he told her about it, she asked, 'Who told you this?' He replied, 'The Knower, the Aware informed me.'

If you two turn in repentance to God, your hearts are inclined to it. But if you support each other against him, then God is his Protector, and so are Gabriel, the righteous believers, and the angels.

If he divorces you, God may give him better wives who are submissive, believing, devout, penitent, worshipful, fasting, previously married, or virgins.

Believers, protect yourselves and your families from a Fire fueled by people and stones, overseen by stern and severe angels who do not disobey God's commands.

On that Day, it will be said to the disbelievers, 'Make no excuses today; you are being repaid for what you did.'

Believers, turn to God with sincere repentance. Your Lord may remove your ills and admit you to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath. On that Day, God will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believe with him. Their light will shine before them, and they will say, 'Our Lord, perfect our light for us and forgive us. You have power over all things.'

O Prophet, strive hard against the disbelievers and hypocrites and be firm with them. Their abode is Hell, a terrible destination.

God gives the example of the wives of Noah and Lot. They were under two righteous servants but betrayed them, and it was said to them, 'Enter the Fire with those who enter.'

God also gives the example of Pharaoh's wife, who prayed, 'My Lord, build for me a home with You in the Garden and save me from Pharaoh and his deeds and from the wrongdoers.'

And Mary, the daughter of 'Imran, who guarded her chastity, and We breathed into her of Our spirit. She believed in the words of her Lord and His Revelations and was one of the devout.

Blessed is He in Whose hands is Dominion, and He has power over all things. He created death and life to test which of you is best in deed. He is the Exalted in Might, the Forgiving.

He created the seven heavens in harmony. You will see no flaw in the creation of the Most Gracious. Look again, do you see any rifts? Look again and again; your vision will return to you dull and exhausted."Look again and again; your vision will return to you confused and fatigued. 

We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps and made them missiles to drive away the evil ones, preparing for them the penalty of the blazing fire. For those who reject their Lord, the penalty of Hell awaits, a terrible destination. When they are cast into it, they will hear its terrible roaring as it blazes forth, almost bursting with fury. Every time a group is cast in, its keepers will ask, "Did no warner come to you?" They will say, "Yes, a warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said, 'God never sent down any message; you are in great error.'"

They will further say, "Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we would not be among the companions of the blazing fire!" They will then confess their sins, but forgiveness will be far from them. As for those who fear their Lord unseen, for them is forgiveness and a great reward. Whether you hide your word or publish it, He certainly knows the secrets of all hearts. Should He not know what He created? He understands the finest mysteries and is well-acquainted with them.

It is He who made the earth manageable for you, so traverse its paths and enjoy the sustenance He provides. But to Him is the resurrection. Do you feel secure that He who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you when it shakes? Or do you feel secure that He will not send a violent tornado against you? Indeed, men before them rejected My warning, and how terrible was My rejection of them!

Do they not observe the birds above them, spreading and folding their wings? None can uphold them except God, Most Gracious. Truly, He watches over all things. Who can help you besides God, Most Merciful? The unbelievers are in nothing but delusion. Who can provide you with sustenance if He withholds His provision? Yet they persist in insolent impiety and flight from the truth.

Is one who walks headlong, with his face groveling, better guided, or one who walks evenly on a straight path? Say, "It is He who created you and made for you the faculties of hearing, seeing, feeling, and understanding. Little thanks you give." Say, "It is He who multiplied you through the earth, and to Him you shall be gathered together." They ask, "When will this promise be fulfilled if you are telling the truth?" Say, "The knowledge of the time is with God alone; I am only a plain warner."

When they see it close at hand, the faces of the unbelievers will be grieved, and it will be said to them, "This is the promise you were calling for!" Say, "See if God were to destroy me and those with me, or if He bestows His mercy on us, who can deliver the unbelievers from a grievous penalty?" Say, "He is God, Most Gracious. We have believed in Him, and on Him, we have put our trust. Soon you will know who is in manifest error." Say, "See if your stream is lost in the underground earth, who then can supply you with clear-flowing water?""If your water were to disappear, who could bring you fresh, flowing water?" - Chapter 68: AL-QALAM (THE PEN) Total Verses: 52 Revealed At: MAKKA

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Nun. By the Pen and what they write,
2. You are not, by the grace of your Lord, mad or possessed.
3. Indeed, you will have an unfailing reward.
4. And you are of great moral character.
5. Soon you will see, and they will see,
6. Which of you is afflicted with madness.
7. Your Lord knows best who has strayed from His path and who is rightly guided.
8. So do not listen to those who deny the truth.
9. They wish you would compromise so they would compromise.
10. Do not obey any despicable person, ready with oaths,
11. A slanderer, spreading calumnies,
12. Habitually hindering good, transgressing beyond bounds, deep in sin,
13. Violent and cruel, with all that, base-born,
14. Because he possesses wealth and numerous sons.
15. When Our signs are recited to him, he says, "Tales of the ancients!"
16. Soon We will brand him on the snout!
17. We have tested them as We tested the People of the Garden, when they resolved to gather the fruits in the morning,
18. But made no reservation, "If it be God's Will."
19. Then a visitation from your Lord came upon it while they slept,
20. And by morning it was like a dark and desolate spot.
21. As the morning broke, they called out to one another,
22. "Go to your tilth in the morning if you would gather the fruits."
23. So they departed, conversing in secret low tones,
24. "Let not a single indigent person break in upon you into the garden this day."
25. And they went early, strong in an unjust resolve.
26. But when they saw the garden, they said, "We have surely lost our way."
27. "Indeed, we are shut out of the fruits of our labor!"
28. One of them, more just than the rest, said, "Did I not say to you, 'Why not glorify God?'"
29. They said, "Glory to our Lord! Verily, we have been doing wrong!"
30. Then they turned, one against another, in reproach.
31. They said, "Alas for us! We have indeed transgressed!"
32. "It may be that our Lord will give us in exchange a better garden than this, for we do turn to Him in repentance!"
33. Such is the punishment in this life, but greater is the punishment in the Hereafter, if only they knew!
34. For the righteous, there are Gardens of Delight in the presence of their Lord.
35. Shall We then treat the people of faith like the people of sin?
36. What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
37. Or do you have a book through which you learn,
38. That you shall have whatever you choose?
39. Or do you have covenants with Us, reaching to the Day of Judgment, that you shall have whatever you demand?
40. Ask them which of them will stand surety for that!
41. Or do they have partners in Godhead? Let them produce their partners if they are truthful!
42. The Day the shin shall be laid bare, and they shall be summoned to bow in adoration, but they shall not be able,
43. Their eyes will be cast down, ignominy will cover them; they had been summoned aforetime to bow in adoration while they were whole, but they refused.
44. Leave Me alone with those who reject this message; by degrees, We shall punish them from directions they perceive not.
45. I will grant them a long respite; truly powerful is My plan."If your water were to vanish, who could bring you fresh, flowing water?" - Chapter 68: AL-QALAM (THE PEN) Total Verses: 52 Revealed At: MAKKA

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Nun. By the Pen and what they write,
2. You are not, by the grace of your Lord, mad or possessed.
3. Indeed, you will have an unfailing reward.
4. And you are of great moral character.
5. Soon you will see, and they will see,
6. Which of you is afflicted with madness.
7. Your Lord knows best who has strayed from His path and who is rightly guided.
8. So do not listen to those who deny the truth.
9. They wish you would compromise so they would compromise.
10. Do not obey any despicable person, ready with oaths,
11. A slanderer, spreading lies,
12. Habitually hindering good, transgressing beyond bounds, deep in sin,
13. Violent and cruel, with all that, base-born,
14. Because he possesses wealth and numerous sons.
15. When Our signs are recited to him, he says, "Tales of the ancients!"
16. Soon We will brand him on the snout!
17. We have tested them as We tested the People of the Garden, when they resolved to gather the fruits in the morning,
18. But made no reservation, "If it be God's Will."
19. Then a visitation from your Lord came upon it while they slept,
20. And by morning it was like a dark and desolate spot.
21. As the morning broke, they called out to one another,
22. "Go to your tilth in the morning if you would gather the fruits."
23. So they departed, conversing in secret low tones,
24. "Let not a single indigent person break in upon you into the garden this day."
25. And they went early, strong in an unjust resolve.
26. But when they saw the garden, they said, "We have surely lost our way."
27. "Indeed, we are shut out of the fruits of our labor!"
28. One of them, more just than the rest, said, "Did I not say to you, 'Why not glorify God?'"
29. They said, "Glory to our Lord! Verily, we have been doing wrong!"
30. Then they turned, one against another, in reproach.
31. They said, "Alas for us! We have indeed transgressed!"
32. "It may be that our Lord will give us in exchange a better garden than this, for we do turn to Him in repentance!"
33. Such is the punishment in this life, but greater is the punishment in the Hereafter, if only they knew!
34. For the righteous, there are Gardens of Delight in the presence of their Lord.
35. Shall We then treat the people of faith like the people of sin?
36. What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
37. Or do you have a book through which you learn,
38. That you shall have whatever you choose?
39. Or do you have covenants with Us, reaching to the Day of Judgment, that you shall have whatever you demand?
40. Ask them which of them will stand surety for that!
41. Or do they have partners in Godhead? Let them produce their partners if they are truthful!
42. The Day the shin shall be laid bare, and they shall be summoned to bow in adoration, but they shall not be able,
43. Their eyes will be cast down, ignominy will cover them; they had been summoned aforetime to bow in adoration while they were whole, but they refused.
44. Leave Me alone with those who reject this message; by degrees, We shall punish them from directions they perceive not.
45. I will grant them a long respite; truly powerful is My plan.

Or is it that you ask them for a reward, so that they are burdened with a load of debt? Or do you ask a fee from them so that they are heavily taxed? Or do they have the knowledge of the unseen, so that they can write it down? So wait with patience for the Command of your Lord, and do not be like the Companion of the Fish, when he cried out in agony. But wait for your Lord's decree, and do not be like him of the fish, who cried out in despair. Had it not been for the favor from his Lord, he would have been cast off on the naked shore, in disgrace. But his Lord chose him and placed him among the righteous. And the Unbelievers would almost trip you up with their eyes when they hear the Message; and they say: "Surely he is possessed!" But it is nothing less than a Message to all the worlds.

Chapter 69: AL-HAAQQA (THE REALITY) Total Verses: 52 Revealed At: MAKKA

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. The Sure Reality!
2. What is the Sure Reality?
3. And what will make you realize what the Sure Reality is?
4. The Thamud and the 'Ad People branded as false the Stunning Calamity!
5. But the Thamud were destroyed by a terrible storm of thunder and lightning!
6. And the 'Ad were destroyed by a furious wind, exceedingly violent;
7. He made it rage against them seven nights and eight days in succession: so that you could see the people lying prostrate in its path, as if they were hollow palm-trees tumbled down!
8. Do you see any of them left surviving?
9. And Pharaoh, and those before him, and the Cities Overthrown, committed habitual sin.
10. And disobeyed each the messenger of their Lord; so He punished them with an abundant penalty.
11. We, when the water of Noah's Flood overflowed beyond its limits, carried you in the floating Ark,
12. That We might make it a Message unto you, and that ears that should hear the tale and retain its memory should bear its lessons in remembrance.
13. Then, when one blast is sounded on the Trumpet,
14. And the earth is moved, and its mountains, and they are crushed to powder at one stroke,
15. On that Day shall the Great Event come to pass.
16. And the sky will be rent asunder, for it will that Day be flimsy,
17. And the angels will be on its sides, and eight will, that Day, bear the Throne of your Lord above them.
18. That Day you will be brought to Judgment: not an act of yours that you hide will be hidden.
19. Then he that will be given his Record in his right hand will say: "Ah here! Read my Record!"
20. "I did really understand that my Account would one day reach me!"
21. And he will be in a life of Bliss,
22. In a Garden on high,
23. The fruits of which will hang in bunches low and near.
24. "Eat and drink with full satisfaction; because of the good that you sent before you, in the days that are gone!"
25. And he that will be given his Record in his left hand will say: "Ah! Would that my Record had not been given to me!"
26. "And that I had never realized how my account stood!"
27. "Ah! Would that death had made an end of me!"
28. "Of no profit to me has been my wealth!"
29. "My power has perished from me!"
30. (The stern command will say): "Seize him, and bind him,"
31. "And burn him in the Blazing Fire."
32. "Further, make him march in a chain, whereof the length is seventy cubits!"
33. "This was he that would not believe in God Most High."
34. "And would not encourage the feeding of the indigent!"
35. "So no friend has he here this Day."
36. "Nor has he any food except the corruption from the washing of wounds,"
37. "Which none do eat but those in sin."
38. So I do call to witness what you see,
39. And what you see not."This is not the word of a poet, as you believe so little. Nor is it the word of a soothsayer, as you remember so little. This is a message sent down from the Lord of the Worlds. If the messenger had fabricated any sayings in Our name, We would have seized him by his right hand and cut off his life-artery. None of you could have withheld Us from him. But this is a message for those who are mindful of God. We know that some of you will reject it, and it will be a cause of sorrow for the disbelievers. But it is the absolute truth. So glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High.

Chapter 70: AL-MAARIJ (THE ASCENDING STAIRWAYS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. A questioner asked about a penalty that will befall the disbelievers, which none can repel,
2. From God, Lord of the Ascending Stairways.
3. The angels and the spirit ascend to Him in a day that measures fifty thousand years.
4. So be patient with a beautiful patience.
5. They see the Day as far off, but We see it as near.
6. The Day when the sky will be like molten brass,
7. And the mountains will be like wool,
8. And no friend will ask about a friend,
9. Though they will be put in sight of each other. The sinner will wish to ransom himself from the penalty of that Day by sacrificing his children,
10. His wife and his brother,
11. His kindred who sheltered him,
12. And all that is on earth, so it could deliver him.
13. But no! It will be the Fire of Hell,
14. Plucking out his being right to the skull,
15. Inviting all who turn their backs and turn away their faces from the Right,
16. And collect wealth and hide it from use.
17. Truly, man was created very impatient,
18. Fretful when evil touches him,
19. And niggardly when good reaches him,
20. Except those devoted to prayer,
21. Those who remain steadfast in their prayer,
22. And those in whose wealth is a recognized right,
23. For the needy who ask and those who are prevented from asking,
24. And those who hold to the truth of the Day of Judgment,
25. And those who fear the displeasure of their Lord,
26. For their Lord's displeasure is the opposite of peace and tranquility,
27. And those who guard their chastity,
28. Except with their wives and those whom their right hands possess, for then they are not to be blamed,
29. But those who trespass beyond this are transgressors,
30. And those who respect their trusts and covenants,
31. And those who stand firm in their testimonies,
32. And those who guard the sacredness of their worship,
33. Such will be the honored ones in the Gardens of Bliss.

34. Now, what is the matter with the disbelievers that they rush madly before you,
35. From the right and from the left, in crowds?
36. Does every man of them long to enter the Garden of Bliss?
37. By no means! For We have created them out of the base matter they know.
38. Now I call to witness the Lord of all points in the East and the West that We can certainly
39. Substitute for them better men than they, and We are not to be defeated in Our plan.""So let them continue with their idle talk and distractions until they face the Day they have been promised. On that Day, they will emerge from their graves in a rush, as if racing towards a goal. Their eyes will be downcast, and disgrace will cover them. This is the Day they were warned about.

Chapter 71: NOAH

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. We sent Noah to his people, saying, 'Warn your people before a painful punishment comes to them.'
2. Noah said, 'O my people, I am a clear and open warner to you.
3. Worship God, fear Him, and obey me.
4. He will forgive your sins and give you respite for a fixed term. When God's term comes, it cannot be delayed, if you only knew.'
5. Noah said, 'My Lord, I have called my people night and day,
6. But my call only increases their flight from the truth.
7. Every time I call them to seek Your forgiveness, they thrust their fingers in their ears, cover themselves with their garments, persist in their refusal, and grow more arrogant.
8. So I called to them aloud,
9. And I spoke to them in public and in private,
10. Saying, 'Ask forgiveness from your Lord; He is truly Most Forgiving.
11. He will send rain to you in abundance,
12. Increase your wealth and children, and provide you with gardens and rivers.
13. What is the matter with you that you do not hope for God's kindness and patience,
14. When He created you in stages?
15. Do you not see how God created the seven heavens one above another,
16. And made the moon a light in their midst, and the sun a radiant lamp?
17. God has caused you to grow from the earth,
18. And He will return you to it and bring you forth again.
19. God has made the earth a wide expanse for you,
20. So you may travel its spacious paths.'

Noah said, 'O my Lord, they have disobeyed me and followed those whose wealth and children only increase their loss.
22. They have devised a tremendous plot,
23. And said to each other, 'Do not abandon your gods. Do not abandon Wadd, Suwa', Yaguth, Ya'uq, or Nasr.'
24. They have already misled many, and You only increase the wrongdoers in straying from the right path.'
25. Because of their sins, they were drowned and made to enter the Fire. They found no helpers besides God.
26. Noah said, 'O my Lord, do not leave a single disbeliever on earth.
27. If You leave them, they will mislead Your servants and will only breed wicked and ungrateful offspring.
28. O my Lord, forgive me, my parents, all who enter my house in faith, and all believing men and women. Do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but destruction.'

Chapter 72: THE JINN

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Say, 'It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listened to the Qur'an. They said, 'We have heard a wonderful Recital!
2. It guides to the right path, and we have believed in it. We will not associate anyone with our Lord.
3. Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord. He has taken neither a wife nor a son.'"In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Say, "It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listened to the Qur'an. They said, 'We have heard a wonderful Recital!
2. It guides to the right path, and we have believed in it. We will not associate anyone with our Lord.
3. Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord. He has taken neither a wife nor a son.
4. There were some foolish ones among us who used to utter extravagant lies against God.
5. But we now realize that no human or jinn should say anything untrue about God.
6. True, there were people among mankind who sought protection from the jinn, but this only increased their folly.
7. They thought, as you did, that God would not raise anyone from the dead.
8. We tried to reach the secrets of heaven but found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires.
9. We used to sit in hidden places to eavesdrop, but now anyone who tries will find a flaming fire waiting for them.
10. We do not know whether harm is intended for those on earth or if their Lord intends to guide them.
11. Among us, some are righteous, and some are not. We follow different paths.
12. We know that we cannot escape from God on earth, nor can we escape by flight.
13. Since we have listened to the Guidance, we have accepted it. Anyone who believes in their Lord has no fear of loss or injustice.
14. Among us, some submit to God, and some deviate from justice. Those who submit have sought the right path.
15. But those who deviate are fuel for Hellfire.
16. If the pagans had remained on the right path, We would have given them abundant water to drink.
17. This is to test them. But if anyone turns away from the remembrance of their Lord, He will cause them to undergo severe punishment.
18. The places of worship are for God alone, so do not invoke anyone along with God.
19. When the Devotee of God stands to invoke Him, they crowd around him.
20. Say, "I only invoke my Lord and do not associate anyone with Him."
21. Say, "I do not have the power to cause you harm or to bring you to the right conduct."
22. Say, "No one can protect me from God, nor can I find refuge except in Him."
23. My duty is only to convey what I receive from God and His messages. For those who disobey God and His Messenger, there is Hell, where they will dwell forever.
24. When they see what they are promised, they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in number.
25. Say, "I do not know whether the punishment you are promised is near or if my Lord will appoint a distant term for it."
26. He alone knows the Unseen and does not reveal His secrets to anyone,
27. Except to a messenger whom He has chosen. He makes a band of watchers march before and behind him,
28. So that He may know that they have truly delivered the messages of their Lord. He surrounds all their doings and keeps count of all things.

Chapter 73: AL-MUZZAMMIL (THE ENSHROUDED ONE, BUNDLED UP)

1. O you who are wrapped up in garments!
2. Stand to pray by night, but not all night,
3. Half of it, or a little less,
4. Or a little more; and recite the Qur'an in slow, measured rhythmic tones.
5. Soon We shall send down to you a weighty Message.In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Say, "It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listened to the Qur'an. They said, 'We have heard a wonderful Recital!
2. It guides to the right path, and we have believed in it. We will not associate anyone with our Lord.
3. Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord. He has taken neither a wife nor a son.
4. There were some foolish ones among us who used to utter extravagant lies against God.
5. But we now realize that no human or jinn should say anything untrue about God.
6. True, there were people among mankind who sought protection from the jinn, but this only increased their folly.
7. They thought, as you did, that God would not raise anyone from the dead.
8. We tried to reach the secrets of heaven but found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires.
9. We used to sit in hidden places to eavesdrop, but now anyone who tries will find a flaming fire waiting for them.
10. We do not know whether harm is intended for those on earth or if their Lord intends to guide them.
11. Among us, some are righteous, and some are not. We follow different paths.
12. We know that we cannot escape from God on earth, nor can we escape by flight.
13. Since we have listened to the Guidance, we have accepted it. Anyone who believes in their Lord has no fear of loss or injustice.
14. Among us, some submit to God, and some deviate from justice. Those who submit have sought the right path.
15. But those who deviate are fuel for Hellfire.
16. If the pagans had remained on the right path, We would have given them abundant water to drink.
17. This is to test them. But if anyone turns away from the remembrance of their Lord, He will cause them to undergo severe punishment.
18. The places of worship are for God alone, so do not invoke anyone along with God.
19. When the Devotee of God stands to invoke Him, they crowd around him.
20. Say, "I only invoke my Lord and do not associate anyone with Him."
21. Say, "I do not have the power to cause you harm or to bring you to the right conduct."
22. Say, "No one can protect me from God, nor can I find refuge except in Him."
23. My duty is only to convey what I receive from God and His messages. For those who disobey God and His Messenger, there is Hell, where they will dwell forever.
24. When they see what they are promised, they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in number.
25. Say, "I do not know whether the punishment you are promised is near or if my Lord will appoint a distant term for it."
26. He alone knows the Unseen and does not reveal His secrets to anyone,
27. Except to a messenger whom He has chosen. He makes a band of watchers march before and behind him,
28. So that He may know that they have truly delivered the messages of their Lord. He surrounds all their doings and keeps count of all things.

Chapter 73: AL-MUZZAMMIL (THE ENSHROUDED ONE, BUNDLED UP)

1. O you who are wrapped up in garments!
2. Stand to pray by night, but not all night,
3. Half of it, or a little less,
4. Or a little more; and recite the Qur'an in slow, measured rhythmic tones.
5. Soon We shall send down to you a weighty Message.

Truly, the rising by night is most potent for governing the soul and most suitable for framing the Word of Prayer and Praise. The vigil of the night is a time when impression is more keen and speech more certain. Surely, the rising by night is the firmest way to tread and the best corrective of speech.

True, there is for you by day prolonged occupation with ordinary duties. You have in the daytime a long occupation. But keep in remembrance the name of your Lord and devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly. Remember the name of your Lord and devote yourself with complete devotion. The Lord of the East and the West: there is no god but He: take Him therefore for your Disposer of Affairs. The Lord of the East and the West; there is no God save Him; so choose Him alone for your defender. The Lord of the East and the West, there is no god but He, therefore take Him for a protector.

And have patience with what they say, and leave them with noble dignity. Bear with patience what they utter, and part from them with a fair leave-taking. Bear patiently what they say and avoid them with a becoming avoidance. Leave Me alone to deal with those in possession of the good things of life, who yet deny the Truth; and bear with them for a little while. Leave Me to deal with the deniers, lords of ease and comfort in this life; and do you respite them awhile. Leave Me and the rejecters, the possessors of ease and plenty, and respite them a little.

With Us are Fetters to bind them, and a Fire to burn them. With Us are heavy fetters and a raging fire. Surely with Us are heavy fetters and a flaming fire. And a Food that chokes, and a Penalty Grievous. And food which chokes the partaker, and a painful doom. And food that chokes and a painful punishment. One Day the earth and the mountains will be in violent commotion. And the mountains will be as a heap of sand poured out and flowing down. On the day when the earth and the hills rock, and the hills become a heap of running sand. On the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountains shall become as heaps of sand let loose.

We have sent to you, O men, a messenger, to be a witness concerning you, even as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh. We have sent unto you a messenger as witness against you, even as We sent unto Pharaoh a messenger. Surely We have sent to you a Messenger, a witness against you, as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh. But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger; so We seized him with a heavy Punishment. But Pharaoh rebelled against the messenger, whereupon We seized him with no gentle grip. But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We laid on him a violent hold.

Then how shall you, if you deny God, guard yourselves against a Day that will make children hoary-headed? Then how, if you disbelieve, will you protect yourselves upon the day which will turn children grey? How, then, will you guard yourselves, if you disbelieve, on the day which shall make children grey-headed? Whereon the sky will be cleft asunder? His Promise needs must be accomplished. The very heaven being then rent asunder. His promise is to be fulfilled. The heaven shall rend asunder thereby; His promise is ever brought to fulfillment.

Verily this is an Admonition: therefore, whoso will, let him take a straight path to his Lord! This is a Reminder. Let him who will, then, choose a way unto his Lord. Surely this is a reminder, then let him, who will take the way to his Lord.

Your Lord knows that you stand to pray nearly two-thirds of the night, or half the night, or a third of the night, and so do a party of those with you. But God appoints night and day in due measure. He knows that you are unable to keep count thereof. So He has turned to you in mercy: read, therefore, of the Qur'an as much as may be easy for you. He knows that there may be some among you in ill-health; others traveling through the land, seeking God's bounty; yet others fighting in God's Cause. Read, therefore, as much of the Qur'an as may be easy for you; and establish regular Prayer and give regular Charity; and loan to God a Beautiful Loan. Whatever good you send forth for your souls, you shall find it in God's Presence, better and greater in reward. Seek the Grace of God: for God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

Chapter 74: AL-MUDDATHTHIR (THE CLOAKED ONE, THE MAN WEARING A CLOAK)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. O you wrapped up in the mantle!
2. Arise and deliver your warning!
3. Magnify your Lord!
4. Keep your garments free from stain!
5. Shun all abomination!
6. Do not expect any increase for yourself in giving!
7. Be patient and constant for your Lord's Cause!
8. When the Trumpet is sounded,
9. That will be a Day of Distress,
10. Far from easy for those without Faith.
11. Leave Me alone to deal with the creature whom I created bare and alone!
12. To whom I granted resources in abundance,
13. And sons to be by his side!
14. To whom I made life smooth and comfortable!
15. Yet he is greedy, wanting more.
16. By no means! For he has been refractory to Our Signs.
17. Soon I will visit him with a mount of calamities!
18. For he thought and plotted;
19. And woe to him! How he plotted!
20. Yes, woe to him; how he plotted!
21. Then he looked around;
22. Then he frowned and scowled;
23. Then he turned back and was haughty;
24. Then he said, "This is nothing but magic, derived from of old;"
25. "This is nothing but the word of a mortal!"
26. Soon I will cast him into Hell-Fire!Chapter 74: AL-MUDDATHTHIR (THE CLOAKED ONE, THE MAN WEARING A CLOAK)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. O you wrapped in a cloak!
2. Get up and warn others!
3. Glorify your Lord!
4. Keep your clothes clean!
5. Avoid all evil!
6. Do not expect anything in return for your good deeds!
7. Be patient and steadfast for your Lord's cause!
8. When the Trumpet is blown,
9. It will be a day of distress,
10. Especially hard for those without faith.
11. Leave Me to deal with the one I created alone,
12. To whom I gave abundant resources,
13. And sons by his side,
14. To whom I made life easy and comfortable,
15. Yet he desires more.
16. No! For he has been stubborn against Our signs.
17. Soon I will overwhelm him with calamities!
18. For he thought and planned;
19. And woe to him! How he planned!
20. Yes, woe to him; how he planned!
21. Then he looked around;
22. Then he frowned and scowled;
23. Then he turned back and was arrogant;
24. Then he said, "This is nothing but magic from the past;"
25. "This is nothing but the word of a human!"
26. Soon I will throw him into Hell-Fire!

27. And what will explain to you what Hell-Fire is?
28. It leaves nothing and spares nothing.
29. It scorches the skin.
30. Over it are nineteen angels.
31. We have appointed only angels as guardians of the Fire, and their number is a trial for the disbelievers, so that the People of the Book may be certain, and the believers may increase in faith, and no doubts may be left for the People of the Book and the believers. Those with a disease in their hearts and the disbelievers will say, "What does God mean by this parable?" Thus God leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. None knows the forces of your Lord except Him. This is nothing but a reminder to humanity.

32. No! By the Moon,
33. And the night as it retreats,
34. And the dawn as it shines forth,
35. This is one of the greatest signs,
36. A warning to humanity,
37. To anyone who chooses to move forward or lag behind.
38. Every soul is held accountable for its deeds,
39. Except the companions of the right hand.
40. They will be in gardens, asking each other
41. About the sinners:
42. "What led you into Hell-Fire?"
43. They will say, "We were not among those who prayed;
44. Nor did we feed the poor;
45. We indulged in vain talk with those who engaged in it;
46. And we denied the Day of Judgment,
47. Until the inevitable came to us."
48. Then no intercession of any intercessors will benefit them.
49. Why do they turn away from the reminder,
50. As if they were frightened donkeys
51. Fleeing from a lion?
52. Each one of them wants to be given open pages from God.
53. No! But they do not fear the Hereafter.
54. No! This is surely a reminder.
55. So whoever wills may remember it.
56. But they will not remember unless God wills. He is the source of righteousness and the source of forgiveness.

Chapter 75: AL-QIYAMA (THE RISING OF THE DEAD, RESURRECTION)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. I swear by the Day of Resurrection;
2. And I swear by the self-reproaching soul.
3. Does man think that We cannot assemble his bones?
4. Yes, We are able to restore even his fingertips.
5. But man wishes to deny what is ahead of him.
6. He asks, "When is the Day of Resurrection?"
7. But when the sight is dazed,
8. And the moon is eclipsed,
9. And the sun and moon are joined together,
10. On that day man will say, "Where is the refuge?"
11. No! There is no refuge!
12. To your Lord alone will be the place of rest that day.
13. On that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and what he left behind.
14. No! Man will be a witness against himself,
15. Even if he presents his excuses.
16. Do not move your tongue with it to hasten it.
17. It is for Us to collect it and recite it.
18. So when We recite it, follow its recitation.
19. Then it is for Us to explain it.
20. No! But you love the fleeting life,
21. And neglect the Hereafter.
22. Some faces that day will be radiant,
23. Looking at their Lord;
24. And some faces that day will be gloomy,
25. Expecting some great calamity to befall them.Chapter 75: AL-QIYAMA (THE RISING OF THE DEAD, RESURRECTION)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. I swear by the Day of Resurrection;
2. And I swear by the self-reproaching soul.
3. Does man think that We cannot reassemble his bones?
4. Yes, We are able to restore even his fingertips.
5. But man wishes to deny what is ahead of him.
6. He asks, "When is the Day of Resurrection?"
7. But when the sight is dazed,
8. And the moon is eclipsed,
9. And the sun and moon are joined together,
10. On that day man will say, "Where is the refuge?"
11. No! There is no refuge!
12. To your Lord alone will be the place of rest that day.
13. On that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and what he left behind.
14. No! Man will be a witness against himself,
15. Even if he presents his excuses.
16. Do not move your tongue with it to hasten it.
17. It is for Us to collect it and recite it.
18. So when We recite it, follow its recitation.
19. Then it is for Us to explain it.
20. No! But you love the fleeting life,
21. And neglect the Hereafter.
22. Some faces that day will be radiant,
23. Looking at their Lord;
24. And some faces that day will be gloomy,
25. Expecting some great calamity to befall them.

26. Yes, when the soul reaches the collarbone (in its exit),
27. And there will be a cry, "Who can restore him?"
28. And he will conclude that it is the time of parting;
29. And one leg will be joined with another:
30. That Day the drive will be to your Lord!
31. So he gave nothing in charity, nor did he pray!
32. But on the contrary, he rejected the truth and turned away!
33. Then he walked to his family in full conceit!
34. Woe to you, yes, woe!
35. Again, woe to you, yes, woe!
36. Does man think that he will be left uncontrolled, without purpose?
37. Was he not a drop of sperm emitted?
38. Then he became a clot; then God shaped and fashioned him.
39. And of him, He made two sexes, male and female.
40. Is not He able to give life to the dead?

Chapter 76: AL-INSAN (MAN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Has there not been over Man a long period of time when he was nothing, not even mentioned?
2. Verily We created Man from a drop of mingled sperm, in order to try him: So We gave him the gifts of hearing and sight.
3. We showed him the Way: whether he be grateful or ungrateful rests on his will.
4. For the Rejecters, We have prepared chains, yokes, and a blazing Fire.
5. As for the Righteous, they shall drink from a cup mixed with Kafur,
6. A fountain where the Devotees of God drink, making it flow in abundance.
7. They perform their vows and fear a Day whose evil spreads far and wide.
8. And they feed, for the love of God, the indigent, the orphan, and the captive,
9. Saying, "We feed you for the sake of God alone: no reward do we desire from you, nor thanks."
10. "We only fear a Day of distressful Wrath from our Lord."
11. But God will deliver them from the evil of that Day and will shed over them a Light of Beauty and Joy.
12. And because they were patient and constant, He will reward them with a Garden and garments of silk.
13. Reclining in the Garden on raised thrones, they will see neither the sun's excessive heat nor the moon's excessive cold.
14. And the shades of the Garden will come low over them, and the bunches of fruit will hang low in humility.
15. And amongst them will be passed round vessels of silver and goblets of crystal,
16. Crystal-clear, made of silver: they will determine the measure thereof according to their wishes.
17. And they will be given to drink from a cup mixed with Zanjabil,
18. A fountain there called Salsabil.
19. And around them will serve youths of perpetual freshness: if you see them, you would think them scattered pearls.
20. And when you look, you will see Bliss and a Magnificent Realm.
21. Upon them will be green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade, and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver; and their Lord will give them a pure and holy drink.
22. "Verily this is a reward for you, and your endeavor is accepted and recognized."
23. It is We Who have sent down the Qur'an to you in stages.
24. Therefore be patient with constancy to the Command of your Lord, and do not obey the sinner or the ungrateful among them.
25. And celebrate the name of your Lord morning and evening.Chapter 76: AL-INSAN (MAN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Was there not a time when man was nothing worth mentioning?
2. We created man from a drop of mixed fluid to test him, and We gave him hearing and sight.
3. We showed him the way, whether he chooses to be grateful or ungrateful.
4. For the disbelievers, We have prepared chains, yokes, and a blazing fire.
5. The righteous will drink from a cup mixed with Kafur,
6. A spring from which the devoted servants of God will drink, making it flow abundantly.
7. They fulfill their vows and fear a day whose evil will spread far and wide.
8. They give food, out of love for Him, to the poor, the orphan, and the captive,
9. Saying, "We feed you for the sake of God alone; we seek neither reward nor thanks from you."
10. "We fear a distressful day from our Lord."
11. So God will protect them from the evil of that day and give them radiance and joy.
12. Because they were patient, He will reward them with a garden and garments of silk.
13. Reclining in the garden on raised thrones, they will see neither the sun's excessive heat nor the moon's excessive cold.
14. The garden's shade will be close over them, and the clusters of fruit will hang low.
15. They will be served with silver vessels and crystal-clear goblets,
16. Crystal-clear, made of silver, perfectly measured.
17. They will drink from a cup mixed with ginger,
18. From a spring called Salsabil.
19. Youths of perpetual freshness will serve them; if you saw them, you would think they were scattered pearls.
20. When you look, you will see bliss and a magnificent realm.
21. They will wear green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade, adorned with silver bracelets, and their Lord will give them a pure drink.
22. "This is a reward for you, and your effort is appreciated."

23. We have sent down the Qur'an to you in stages.
24. So be patient with your Lord's command and do not obey the sinner or the ungrateful among them.
25. Celebrate your Lord's name morning and evening.

26. And during part of the night, prostrate yourself to Him and glorify Him for a long part of the night.
27. These people love the fleeting life and neglect a hard day ahead.
28. We created them and strengthened their frame, and when We will, We can replace them with others like them.
29. This is a reminder; whoever wills, let him take a straight path to his Lord.
30. But you will not, unless God wills; for God is full of knowledge and wisdom.
31. He admits to His mercy whom He wills, but for the wrongdoers, He has prepared a painful punishment.

Chapter 77: AL-MURSALAT (THE EMISSARIES, WINDS SENT FORTH)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the winds sent forth one after another,
2. Which then blow violently in tempestuous gusts,
3. And scatter things far and wide,
4. Then separate them one from another,
5. Then spread abroad a message,
6. Whether of justification or of warning;
7. Surely what you are promised must come to pass.
8. When the stars become dim,
9. When the sky is cleft asunder,
10. When the mountains are scattered as dust,
11. And when the messengers are appointed a time to collect;
12. For what day are these portents deferred?
13. For the Day of Sorting out.
14. And what will explain to you what the Day of Sorting out is?
15. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
16. Did We not destroy the men of old for their evil?
17. So shall We make later generations follow them.
18. Thus do We deal with men of sin.
19. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
20. Did We not create you from a despicable fluid?
21. Which We placed in a secure resting place,
22. For a period determined according to need?
23. We determine things; We are the best at determining.
24. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
25. Have We not made the earth a place to draw together,
26. Both for the living and the dead,
27. And made therein mountains standing firm, and provided you with sweet water?
28. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
29. "Depart to that which you used to reject as false!"
30. "Depart to a shadow of smoke ascending in three columns,"
31. "Which yields no shade of coolness and is of no use against the fierce blaze."
32. "Indeed, it throws about sparks as huge as forts,"
33. "As if they were yellow camels."
34. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
35. That will be a day when they shall not be able to speak,
36. Nor will it be open to them to put forth pleas.
37. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
38. That will be a day of sorting out! We shall gather you and those before you!
39. Now, if you have a trick or plot, use it against Me!
40. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
41. As for the righteous, they shall be amidst cool shades and springs of water,
42. And they shall have fruits, all they desire.
43. "Eat and drink to your heart's content for what you worked in righteousness."
44. Thus do We reward the doers of good.
45. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
46. "Eat and enjoy yourselves a little while, for you are sinners."
47. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
48. When it is said to them, "Prostrate yourselves!" they do not do so.
49. Woe that day to the rejecters of truth!
50. Then what message, after this, will they believe in?Chapter 78: AN-NABA (THE TIDINGS, THE ANNOUNCEMENT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. What are they disputing about?
2. About the Great News,
3. Which they are in disagreement about.
4. Indeed, they will soon know!
5. Again, they will soon know!
6. Have We not made the earth a wide expanse,
7. And the mountains as pegs?
8. And created you in pairs,
9. And made your sleep for rest,
10. And made the night as a covering,
11. And made the day for livelihood?
12. And built above you seven strong heavens,
13. And placed a shining lamp (the sun)?
14. And sent down abundant water from the clouds,
15. To produce grain and plants,
16. And gardens of lush growth?
17. Indeed, the Day of Decision is appointed,
18. The Day when the Trumpet will be blown, and you will come forth in crowds,
19. And the heavens will be opened as if there were doors,
20. And the mountains will vanish like a mirage.
21. Truly, Hell is lying in wait,
22. A home for the rebellious.
23. They will dwell therein for ages.
24. They will taste neither coolness nor drink,
25. Except boiling water and a dark, murky fluid,
26. A fitting recompense for them.
27. For they did not fear any reckoning,
28. And they denied Our signs with strong denial.
29. And We have recorded everything in a Book.
30. So taste (the fruits of your deeds); for We will not increase you except in punishment.

31. Indeed, for the righteous, there will be a fulfillment of their desires;
32. Gardens enclosed and vineyards,
33. And companions of equal age,
34. And a cup full to the brim.
35. They will hear no vain talk or lying therein,
36. A reward from your Lord, a gift amply sufficient,
37. From the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all between, the Most Gracious: None shall have power to argue with Him.
38. The Day when the Spirit and the angels will stand forth in ranks, none shall speak except those permitted by the Most Gracious, and they will say what is right.
39. That Day will be the sure Reality: So whoever wills, let him take a straight path to his Lord!
40. Indeed, We have warned you of a near punishment, the Day when man will see what his hands have sent forth, and the disbeliever will say, "Woe unto me! Would that I were dust!"

Chapter 79: AN-NAZIAT (THOSE WHO DRAG FORTH, SOUL-SNATCHERS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By those (angels) who violently pull out the souls of the wicked,
2. And by those who gently draw out the souls of the blessed,
3. And by those who glide along (on errands of mercy),
4. Then press forward as in a race,
5. Then arrange to do the commands of their Lord,
6. One Day everything that can be in commotion will be in violent commotion,
7. Followed by oft-repeated commotions:
8. Hearts that Day will be in agitation;
9. Cast down will be their owners' eyes.
10. They say now: "What! Shall we indeed be returned to our former state?"
11. "What! When we shall have become rotten bones?"
12. They say: "It would, in that case, be a return with loss!"
13. But indeed, it will be but a single compelling cry,
14. When, behold, they will be in the full awakening to Judgment.
15. Has the story of Moses reached you?
16. How his Lord called him in the sacred valley of Tuwa:
17. "Go to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds:
18. And say to him, 'Would you like to purify yourself?'"Chapter 80: ABASA (HE FROWNED)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. The Prophet frowned and turned away
2. Because a blind man came to him.
3. But how do you know? Maybe he wanted to grow in spiritual understanding,
4. Or receive guidance that might benefit him.
5. As for the one who thinks he is self-sufficient,
6. You pay attention to him,
7. Even though it’s not your concern if he doesn’t grow spiritually.
8. But the one who comes to you with earnest effort,
9. And has fear in his heart,
10. You are distracted from him.
11. No! This is indeed a message of instruction:
12. So let whoever wills, keep it in remembrance.
13. It is in books held in high honor,
14. Exalted and kept pure,
15. Written by the hands of noble and righteous scribes.
16. Woe to man! What has made him reject God?
17. From what substance did He create him?
18. From a sperm-drop: He created him and then shaped him in due proportions;
19. Then He made his path smooth for him;
20. Then He causes him to die and puts him in his grave;
21. Then, when He wills, He will raise him up again.
22. But man has not fulfilled what God commanded him.
23. Let man look at his food,
24. How We pour water in abundance,
25. And split the earth in fragments,
26. And produce therein grain,
27. And grapes and nutritious plants,
28. And olives and dates,
29. And enclosed gardens, dense with lofty trees,
30. And fruits and fodder,
31. For use and convenience to you and your cattle.
32. But when the Deafening Noise comes,
33. That Day a man will flee from his own brother,
34. And from his mother and his father,
35. And from his wife and his children.
36. Every man, that Day, will have enough to make him careless of others.
37. Some faces that Day will be bright,
38. Laughing, rejoicing at good news.
39. And other faces that Day will be dust-stained,
40. Covered with darkness.
41. Those are the disbelievers, the wicked ones.Chapter 81: AT-TAKWIR (THE OVERTHROWING)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. When the sun is folded up,
2. When the stars lose their light,
3. When the mountains vanish like a mirage,
4. When the pregnant camels are left untended,
5. When the wild beasts are gathered together,
6. When the oceans boil over,
7. When the souls are sorted out,
8. When the female infant buried alive is questioned
9. For what crime she was killed,
10. When the scrolls are laid open,
11. When the sky is unveiled,
12. When the Blazing Fire is kindled fiercely,
13. And when the Garden is brought near,
14. Then every soul will know what it has put forward.

15. I call to witness the planets that recede,
16. That go straight or hide,
17. And the Night as it dissipates,
18. And the Dawn as it breathes away the darkness,
19. This is the word of a most honorable Messenger,
20. Endowed with power, with rank before the Lord of the Throne,
21. With authority there, and faithful to his trust.
22. Your companion is not possessed;
23. He saw him in the clear horizon.
24. He does not withhold knowledge of the Unseen.
25. Nor is it the word of an evil spirit accursed.
26. So where are you going?
27. This is a message to all the worlds,
28. For whoever among you wills to go straight.
29. But you will not will except as God wills, the Cherisher of the Worlds.

Chapter 82: AL-INFITAR (THE CLEAVING, BURSTING APART)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. When the sky is cleft asunder,
2. When the stars are scattered,
3. When the oceans burst forth,
4. When the graves are turned upside down,
5. Then every soul will know what it has sent forward and what it has kept back.

6. O man! What has seduced you from your Lord Most Beneficent,
7. Who created you, fashioned you in due proportion, and gave you a just bias?
8. In whatever form He wills, He puts you together.
9. But you reject the Right and Judgment!
10. Over you are appointed angels to protect you,
11. Kind and honorable, writing down your deeds.
12. They know all that you do.

13. The Righteous will be in bliss,
14. And the Wicked will be in the Fire,
15. Which they will enter on the Day of Judgment,
16. And they will not be able to keep away from it.

17. What will explain to you what the Day of Judgment is?
18. Again, what will explain to you what the Day of Judgment is?
19. It is the Day when no soul shall have power to do anything for another; the command that Day will be entirely with God.

Chapter 83: AL-MUTAFFIFIN (DEFRAUDING, THE CHEATS, CHEATING)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Woe to those who deal in fraud,
2. Those who, when they receive by measure from men, exact full measure,
3. But when they give by measure or weight to men, give less than due.
4. Do they not think that they will be called to account,
5. On a Mighty Day,
6. A Day when all...Chapter 84: AL-INSHIQAQ (THE SUNDERING, SPLITTING OPEN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. When the sky is split apart,
2. When the stars are scattered,
3. When the earth is flattened out,
4. And it throws out everything inside it and becomes empty,
5. And listens to its Lord and obeys—it must do so.

6. O human! You are striving towards your Lord, and you will meet Him.
7. Whoever receives their record in their right hand,
8. Will have an easy reckoning,
9. And will return to their people, rejoicing.
10. But whoever receives their record behind their back,
11. Will cry for destruction,
12. And will enter a blazing fire.
13. They used to be happy among their people,
14. And thought they would never return to Us.
15. But their Lord was always watching them.

16. I swear by the afterglow of sunset,
17. And by the night and what it envelops,
18. And by the full moon,
19. You will surely move from stage to stage.

20. So what is the matter with them that they do not believe?
21. And when the Qur'an is recited to them, they do not prostrate?
22. Instead, the disbelievers deny it.
23. But God knows best what they hide in their hearts.
24. So give them the news of a painful punishment,
25. Except for those who believe and do good deeds; for them is a reward that will never end.

Chapter 85: AL-BUROOJ (THE MANSIONS OF THE STARS, CONSTELLATIONS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.Chapter 85: AL-BUROOJ (THE MANSIONS OF THE STARS, CONSTELLATIONS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the sky with its constellations,
2. And by the promised Day of Judgment,
3. And by the witness and the witnessed,
4. Cursed were the makers of the pit,
5. The fire supplied with fuel,
6. When they sat by it,
7. And witnessed what they did to the believers.
8. They persecuted them only because they believed in God, the Mighty, the Praiseworthy,
9. To whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. And God is Witness over all things.
10. Those who persecute the believing men and women and do not repent will have the punishment of Hell and the burning fire.
11. But those who believe and do righteous deeds will have gardens beneath which rivers flow. That is the great success.
12. Truly, the grip of your Lord is strong.
13. It is He who creates from the beginning and can restore life.
14. And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Full of Loving-Kindness,
15. Lord of the Throne of Glory,
16. Doer of what He intends.
17. Has the story reached you of the forces,
18. Of Pharaoh and Thamud?
19. Yet the disbelievers persist in denying the truth.
20. But God encompasses them from behind.
21. Nay, this is a Glorious Qur'an,
22. Inscribed in a Preserved Tablet.

Chapter 86: AT-TARIQ (THE MORNING STAR, THE NIGHTCOMER)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the sky and the night-visitant,
2. And what will explain to you what the night-visitant is?
3. It is the star of piercing brightness.
4. There is no soul but has a protector over it.
5. Let man consider from what he is created.
6. He is created from a gushing fluid,
7. That issues from between the loins and ribs.
8. Surely, God is able to bring him back to life.
9. On the day when hidden thoughts will be examined,
10. Then he will have no power nor any helper.
11. By the sky which returns rain,
12. And by the earth which splits with growth,
13. This is a decisive word,
14. It is not a thing for amusement.
15. They are plotting a scheme,
16. And I am planning a scheme.
17. So give respite to the disbelievers, deal gently with them for a while.

Chapter 87: AL-ALA (THE MOST HIGH, GLORY TO YOUR LORD IN THE HIGHEST)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High,
2. Who created and perfected,
3. Who determined and guided,
4. Who brings out the green pasture,
5. And then makes it dry stubble.
6. We will make you recite, so you will not forget,
7. Except what God wills. He knows what is manifest and what is hidden.
8. And We will make your way smooth.
9. So remind, if the reminder benefits.
10. The reminder will be received by those who fear God,
11. But the most unfortunate will avoid it,
12. Who will enter the great fire,
13. Where they will neither die nor live.
14. But those who purify themselves will prosper,
15. And remember the name of their Lord and pray.
16. But you prefer the life of this world,
17. While the Hereafter is better and more enduring.
18. This is in the former scriptures,
19. The scriptures of Abraham and Moses.Chapter 88: AL-GHASHIYA (THE OVERWHELMING EVENT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Have you heard about the overwhelming event?
2. On that day, some faces will be humbled,
3. Exhausted and weary,
4. Entering a blazing fire,
5. Drinking from a boiling spring,
6. With no food except bitter thorns,
7. Which neither nourish nor satisfy hunger.
8. Other faces that day will be joyful,
9. Pleased with their efforts,
10. In a high garden,
11. Where they will hear no idle talk,
12. With a bubbling spring,
13. Raised thrones,
14. Goblets ready,
15. Cushions set in rows,
16. And rich carpets spread out.
17. Do they not look at the camels, how they are created?
18. And at the sky, how it is raised high?
19. And at the mountains, how they are fixed firm?
20. And at the earth, how it is spread out?
21. So remind them, for you are only a reminder.
22. You are not a manager over them.
23. But if anyone turns away and rejects God,
24. God will punish them with a mighty punishment.
25. To Us is their return,
26. And then it is for Us to call them to account.

Chapter 89: AL-FAJR (THE DAWN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the break of day,
2. And by the ten nights,
3. By the even and the odd,
4. And by the night when it passes away,
5. Is there not in these an oath for those who understand?
6. Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the 'Ad people,
7. Of the city of Iram with lofty pillars,
8. The like of which was not created in the land?
9. And with the Thamud people, who carved out rocks in the valley,
10. And with Pharaoh, lord of stakes?
11. They all transgressed beyond bounds in the lands,
12. And heaped therein mischief.
13. So your Lord poured on them a scourge of diverse punishments.
14. For your Lord is ever watchful.
15. As for man, when his Lord tests him by giving him honor and gifts, he says, "My Lord has honored me."
16. But when He tests him by restricting his subsistence, he says, "My Lord has humiliated me."
17. No! But you do not honor the orphan,
18. Nor do you encourage one another to feed the poor,
19. And you devour inheritance with greed,
20. And you love wealth with inordinate love.
21. No! When the earth is pounded to powder,
22. And your Lord comes with angels, rank upon rank,
23. And Hell is brought near that day, on that day man will remember, but how will that remembrance benefit him?
24. He will say, "Oh, I wish I had sent forth good deeds for my life!"
25. For that day, His punishment will be such as none else can inflict,
26. And His bonds will be such as none other can bind.
27. (To the righteous soul will be said:) "O soul, in complete rest and satisfaction,
28. Come back to your Lord, well pleased and well-pleasing,
29. Enter among My devotees,
30. Yes, enter My Heaven."

Chapter 90: AL-BALAD (THE CITY)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. I swear by this city,
2. And you are a freeman of this city,
3. And by the parent and the child,
4. Verily, We have created man into toil and struggle.Chapter 93: AD-DHUHA (THE MORNING HOURS, MORNING BRIGHT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the Glorious Morning Light,
2. And by the Night when it is still,
3. Your Guardian-Lord has not forsaken you, nor is He displeased.
4. Indeed, the Hereafter will be better for you than the present.
5. And soon your Guardian-Lord will give you so much that you will be pleased.
6. Did He not find you an orphan and give you shelter?
7. And He found you lost and guided you,
8. And He found you in need and made you self-sufficient.
9. Therefore, do not oppress the orphan,
10. Nor repulse the one who asks for help,
11. But proclaim the blessings of your Lord.Chapter 93: AD-DHUHA (THE MORNING HOURS, MORNING BRIGHT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the Glorious Morning Light,
2. And by the Night when it is still,
3. Your Guardian-Lord has not forsaken you, nor is He displeased.
4. Indeed, the Hereafter will be better for you than the present.
5. And soon your Guardian-Lord will give you so much that you will be pleased.
6. Did He not find you an orphan and give you shelter?
7. And He found you lost and guided you,
8. And He found you in need and made you self-sufficient.
9. Therefore, do not oppress the orphan,
10. Nor repulse the one who asks for help,
11. But proclaim the blessings of your Lord.

Chapter 94: AL-INSHIRAH (SOLACE, CONSOLATION, RELIEF)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Have We not expanded your chest?
2. And removed from you your burden,
3. Which weighed down your back?
4. And raised high your esteem?
5. So, verily, with every difficulty, there is relief:
6. Indeed, with every difficulty, there is relief.
7. Therefore, when you are free from your immediate task, still labor hard,
8. And turn all your attention to your Lord.

Chapter 95: AT-TIN (THE FIG, THE FIGTREE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the Fig and the Olive,
2. And the Mount of Sinai,
3. And this City of security,
4. We have indeed created man in the best of molds,
5. Then We reduce him to the lowest of the low,
6. Except those who believe and do righteous deeds: For they shall have a reward unfailing.
7. Then what can contradict you, as to the judgment to come?
8. Is not God the wisest of judges?

Chapter 96: AL-ALAQ (THE CLOT, READ)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Read in the name of your Lord who created,
2. Created man from a clot.
3. Read, and your Lord is Most Bountiful,
4. Who taught by the pen,
5. Taught man what he knew not.
6. But man transgresses all bounds,
7. Because he sees himself as self-sufficient.
8. Surely, to your Lord is the return.
9. Have you seen the one who forbids
10. A servant when he prays?
11. Have you considered if he is on the right path,
12. Or enjoins righteousness?
13. Have you considered if he denies the truth and turns away?
14. Does he not know that God sees?
15. Let him beware! If he does not desist, We will drag him by the forelock,
16. A lying, sinful forelock!
17. Then let him call his council of comrades:
18. We will call on the angels of punishment to deal with him!
19. No, do not obey him. But bow down in adoration, and draw closer to God.

Chapter 97: AL-QADR (POWER, FATE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. We have indeed revealed this message in the Night of Power:
2. And what will explain to you what the Night of Power is?
3. The Night of Power is better than a thousand months.
4. The angels and the Spirit descend therein, by the permission of their Lord, with all decrees.
5. Peace! It is until the rise of dawn.

Chapter 98: AL-BAYYINA (THE CLEAR PROOF, EVIDENCE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Those who reject the truth, among the People of the Book and among the Polytheists, were not going to depart from their ways until there came to them clear evidence,
2. A messenger from God, reciting pure scriptures,
3. Containing correct decrees.
4. Nor did the People of the Book make schisms until after there came to them clear evidence.
5. And they have been commanded no more than this: To worship God, offering Him sincere devotion, being true in faith; to establish regular prayer; and to practice regular charity; and that is the right religion.
6. Those who reject the truth, among the People of the Book and among the Polytheists, will be in Hell-Fire, to dwell therein forever. They are the worst of creatures.
7. Those who have faith...Chapter 98: AL-BAYYINA (THE CLEAR PROOF, EVIDENCE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Those who reject the truth, among the People of the Book and the Polytheists, were not going to change their ways until clear evidence came to them,
2. A messenger from God, reciting pure scriptures,
3. Containing correct decrees.
4. The People of the Book did not become divided until after clear evidence came to them.
5. They were only commanded to worship God, being sincere in their faith, to establish regular prayer, and to practice regular charity. This is the right religion.
6. Those who reject the truth, among the People of the Book and the Polytheists, will be in Hell-Fire, to dwell there forever. They are the worst of creatures.
7. Those who have faith and do righteous deeds are the best of creatures.
8. Their reward is with God: Gardens of Eternity, beneath which rivers flow; they will dwell there forever. God is well pleased with them, and they with Him. This is for those who fear their Lord.

Chapter 99: AL-ZALZALA (THE EARTHQUAKE)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. When the earth is shaken with its final earthquake,
2. And the earth throws up its burdens,
3. And man cries out, 'What is happening to her?'
4. On that Day, she will declare her news,
5. Because your Lord will have inspired her.
6. On that Day, people will come forward in scattered groups to be shown their deeds.
7. Whoever has done an atom's weight of good will see it,
8. And whoever has done an atom's weight of evil will see it.

Chapter 100: AL-ADIYAT (THE COURSER, THE CHARGERS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the steeds that run with panting breath,
2. And strike sparks of fire,
3. And charge at dawn,
4. Raising clouds of dust,
5. And penetrating into the midst of the enemy,
6. Truly, man is ungrateful to his Lord,
7. And he himself bears witness to this,
8. And he is violent in his love of wealth.
9. Does he not know that when the contents of the graves are scattered,
10. And the secrets of the hearts are revealed,
11. Their Lord will be fully aware of them on that Day?

Chapter 101: AL-QARIA (THE CALAMITY, THE STUNNING BLOW, THE DISASTER)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. The Calamity!
2. What is the Calamity?
3. And what will explain to you what the Calamity is?
4. It is a Day when people will be like scattered moths,
5. And the mountains will be like carded wool.
6. Then, he whose balance of good deeds is heavy,
7. Will live a pleasant life.
8. But he whose balance is light,
9. Will have his home in a bottomless pit.
10. And what will explain to you what this is?
11. It is a Fire blazing fiercely!

Chapter 102: AT-TAKATHUR (RIVALRY IN WORLD INCREASE, COMPETITION)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. The mutual rivalry for piling up worldly things diverts you,
2. Until you visit the graves.
3. But no, you will soon know!
4. Again, you will soon know!
5. If you knew with certainty of mind, you would beware!
6. You will certainly see Hell-Fire!
7. Again, you will see it with certainty of sight!
8. Then, on that Day, you will be questioned about the joy you indulged in.

Chapter 103: AL-ASR (THE DECLINING DAY, EVENTIDE, THE EPOCH)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. By the declining day,
2. Verily, man is in loss,
3. Except those who have faith, do righteous deeds, and encourage each other to truth and patience.

Chapter 104: AL-HUMAZA (THE TRADUCER, THE GOSSIPMONGER)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Woe to every scandal-monger and backbiter,
2. Who piles up wealth and counts it,
3. Thinking that his wealth will make him last forever!
4. By no means! He will be thrown into the Consuming Fire.
5. And what will explain to you what the Consuming Fire is?
6. It is the Fire of God, kindled,
7. Which rises above the hearts.
8. It will be closed in on them,
9. In outstretched columns.

Chapter 105: AL-FIL (THE ELEPHANT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the Companions of the Elephant?Chapter 105: AL-FIL (THE ELEPHANT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the companions of the elephant?
2. Did He not make their treacherous plan go astray?
3. And He sent against them flocks of birds,
4. Striking them with stones of baked clay,
5. Then He made them like eaten straw.

Chapter 106: QURAISH (WINTER, QURAYSH)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. For the protection of the Quraish,
2. Their protection during their trading journeys in winter and summer,
3. Let them worship the Lord of this House,
4. Who provides them with food against hunger and security against fear.

Chapter 107: AL-MAUN (SMALL KINDNESSES, ALMSGIVING, HAVE YOU SEEN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Have you seen the one who denies the Judgment?
2. That is the one who repels the orphan,
3. And does not encourage the feeding of the poor.
4. So woe to those who pray,
5. But are heedless of their prayers,
6. Those who only want to be seen,
7. And refuse small kindnesses.

Chapter 108: AL-KAUTHER (ABUNDANCE, PLENTY)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. We have granted you abundance.
2. So pray to your Lord and sacrifice.
3. Indeed, your enemy is the one cut off.

Chapter 109: AL-KAFIROON (THE DISBELIEVERS, ATHEISTS)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Say: O disbelievers,
2. I do not worship what you worship,
3. Nor do you worship what I worship.
4. I will not worship what you worship,
5. Nor will you worship what I worship.
6. To you be your religion, and to me mine.

Chapter 110: AN-NASR (SUCCOUR, DIVINE SUPPORT)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. When the help of God and victory come,
2. And you see people entering God's religion in crowds,
3. Celebrate the praises of your Lord and seek His forgiveness. He is always ready to show mercy.

Chapter 111: AL-MASADD (PALM FIBRE, THE FLAME)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Perish the hands of Abu Lahab, and perish he!
2. His wealth and gains will not benefit him.
3. He will be plunged into a flaming fire,
4. And his wife, the wood-carrier,
5. Will have a rope of palm-fibre around her neck.

Chapter 112: AL-IKHLAS (SINCERITY)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Say: He is God, the One and Only;
2. God, the Eternal, Absolute;
3. He begets not, nor is He begotten;
4. And there is none like unto Him.

Chapter 113: AL-FALAQ (THE DAYBREAK, DAWN)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of the Dawn,
2. From the mischief of created things;
3. From the mischief of darkness as it overspreads;
4. From the mischief of those who practice secret arts;
5. And from the mischief of the envious one as he practices envy.

Chapter 114: AN-NAS (MANKIND)

In the name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

1. Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of Mankind,
2. The King of Mankind,
3. The God of Mankind,
4. From the mischief of the Whisperer (of Evil), who withdraws (after his whisper),
5. Who whispers into the hearts of Mankind,
6. Among jinns and among men.