**The Egyptian Book of the Dead**

**Introduction to the Chapters of Coming Forth by Day**

This ancient text, known as the Egyptian Book of the Dead, contains chapters that guide the deceased through the afterlife. These chapters are recited on the day of burial to ensure the deceased's resurrection and glory. Here are some key chapters:

1. **Chapter for Coming Forth by Day and Living After Death**
2. **Chapter for Traveling on the Road Above the Earth**
3. **Chapter to Avoid Being Assigned Work in the Netherworld**
4. **Chapter to Make Funerary Statuettes Work for the Deceased in the Netherworld**
5. **Chapter for Passing Through the Void of Apepi**
6. **Chapter for Opening the Tuat by Day**
7. **Chapter for Coming Forth Victoriously**
8. **Chapter for Confronting Adversaries in the Netherworld**
9. **Chapter for Entering and Exiting the Netherworld**
10. **Chapter for Removing the God's Displeasure Against the Deceased**
11. **Hymns to Ra at His Rising and Setting**
12. **Chapter for Opening the Mouth in the Netherworld**
13. **Chapter for Remembering One's Name in the Netherworld**
14. **Chapter for Keeping the Heart in the Netherworld**
15. **Chapter for Repelling Crocodiles and Serpents in the Netherworld**
16. **Chapter for Living by the Breath of Air in the Netherworld**
17. **Chapter for Avoiding Slaughter in the Netherworld**
18. **Chapter for Not Dying a Second Time**
19. **Chapter for Escaping Corruption in the Netherworld**
20. **Chapter for Breathing Air and Commanding Water in the Netherworld**
21. **Chapter for Assuming Various Forms, Such as the Golden Hawk or the Lotus**
22. **Chapter for Uniting the Soul with the Dead Body**
23. **Chapter for Restoring Memory**
24. **Chapter for Securing the Soul from Imprisonment in the Netherworld**
25. **Chapter for Opening the Tomb to the Soul and Shade**
26. **Chapter for Sailing a Ship in the Netherworld**
27. **Chapter for Entering the Bark of Ra**
28. **Chapter for Knowing the Powers of the West and East**
29. **Chapter for Arriving at the Garden of Aaru**

These chapters are designed to help the deceased navigate the afterlife, ensuring they can live, work, and enjoy pleasures similar to those on earth.**The Egyptian Book of the Dead**

**Introduction to the Chapters of Coming Forth by Day**

This ancient text, known as the Egyptian Book of the Dead, contains chapters that guide the deceased through the afterlife. These chapters are recited on the day of burial to ensure the deceased's resurrection and glory. Here are some key chapters:

1. **Chapter for Coming Forth by Day and Living After Death**
2. **Chapter for Traveling on the Road Above the Earth**
3. **Chapter to Avoid Being Assigned Work in the Netherworld**
4. **Chapter to Make Funerary Statuettes Work for the Deceased in the Netherworld**
5. **Chapter for Passing Through the Void of Apepi**
6. **Chapter for Opening the Tuat by Day**
7. **Chapter for Coming Forth Victoriously**
8. **Chapter for Confronting Adversaries in the Netherworld**
9. **Chapter for Entering and Exiting the Netherworld**
10. **Chapter for Removing the God's Displeasure Against the Deceased**
11. **Hymns to Ra at His Rising and Setting**
12. **Chapter for Opening the Mouth in the Netherworld**
13. **Chapter for Remembering One's Name in the Netherworld**
14. **Chapter for Keeping the Heart in the Netherworld**
15. **Chapter for Repelling Crocodiles and Serpents in the Netherworld**
16. **Chapter for Living by the Breath of Air in the Netherworld**
17. **Chapter for Avoiding Slaughter in the Netherworld**
18. **Chapter for Not Dying a Second Time**
19. **Chapter for Escaping Corruption in the Netherworld**
20. **Chapter for Breathing Air and Commanding Water in the Netherworld**
21. **Chapter for Assuming Various Forms, Such as the Golden Hawk or the Lotus**
22. **Chapter for Uniting the Soul with the Dead Body**
23. **Chapter for Restoring Memory**
24. **Chapter for Securing the Soul from Imprisonment in the Netherworld**
25. **Chapter for Opening the Tomb to the Soul and Shade**
26. **Chapter for Sailing a Ship in the Netherworld**
27. **Chapter for Entering the Bark of Ra**
28. **Chapter for Knowing the Powers of the West and East**
29. **Chapter for Arriving at the Garden of Aaru**

These chapters are designed to help the deceased navigate the afterlife, ensuring they can live, work, and enjoy pleasures similar to those on earth.

**Chapters Detailing the Powers and Paths in the Afterlife**

CXV. Chapter for Entering Heaven and Opening the Ammehit, and Knowing the Powers of Heliopolis.
CXVI. Chapter for Knowing the Power of Hermopolis.
CXVII. Chapter for Taking the Blissful Path at Restau.
CXVIII. Chapter for Arriving at Restau.
CXIX. Chapter for Entering or Leaving Restau.
CXX. (Same as Chapter XII)
CXXI. (Same as Chapter XIII)
CXXII. (Same as Chapter LVIII)
CXXIII. Chapter for Entering the Great House.
CXXIV. Chapter for Coming to the Divine Circle of Osiris.
CXXV. Part I: Said on Arriving at the Hall of Righteousness, to be Freed from All Sins and to See the Divine Faces.
Part II: The Negative Confession.
Part III: Said When Approaching the Gods in the Teat.
CXXVI. The Book for Invoking the Gods of the Bounds, Recited When Approaching Them to Enter and See the Strong One in the Great Abode of the Tuat.
CXXVIII. Invocation of Osiris.
CXXIX. (Same as Chapter C)
CXXX. A Book for Making the Soul Live Forever on the Day of Entering the Bark of Ra, and Passing the Sheniu of the Tuat. Made on the Birthday of Osiris.
CXXXI. Chapter for Proceeding into Heaven by the Side of Ra.
CXXXII. Chapter for Visiting One's Dwelling in the Netherworld.
CXXXIII. Book for Acquiring Might in the Netherworld, in the Presence of the Great Cycle of the Gods.
CXXXIV. Chapter for Acquiring Might.
CXXXV. Another Chapter Recited When the Moon Renews Itself on the First Day of the Month.
CXXXVIa. Chapter for Being Conveyed in the Bark of Ra.
CXXXVIb. Chapter for Being Conveyed in the Great Bark of Ra to Pass Through the Orbit of Flame.
CXXXVIIa. Chapter for Kindling a Light for a Person.
CXXXVIIb. Chapter for Kindling a Light for a Person.
CXXXVIII. Chapter for Entering into Abydos.
CXXXIX. (Same as Chapter CXXIII)
CXL. The Book Read on the Last Day of Mechir, When the Eye is Full on the Last Day of Mechir.
CXLI. The Book Said by a Man or His Father or His Son During the Festival of the Amenta, to Acquire Might with Ra and the Gods.
CXLII. The Chapter of the Arrival.
CXLV and CXLVI. The Knowing of the Pylons of the House of Osiris in the Garden of Aaru.
CXLVII. Giving Sustenance to the Deceased in the Netherworld and Delivering Him from All Evil Things.
CXLVIII. Chapter of the Mysterious Head.
CXLIX. Chapter of Building a House on Earth.
CL. Chapter of Coming Out of the Net.
CLI. Chapter of Escaping from the Catchers of Fish.
CLII. Chapter of Not Letting the Body Decay in the Netherworld.
CLIIIa. Chapter of the Tat of Gold.
CLIIIb. Chapter of the Buckle of Carnelian, Placed on the Neck of the Deceased.
CLIV. Chapter of the Vulture of Gold, Placed on the Neck of the Deceased.
CLV. Chapter of the Collar of Gold, Placed on the Neck of the Deceased.
CLVI. Chapter of the Column of Green Felspar, Placed on the Neck of the Deceased.
CLVII. Giving the Column of Green Felspar.
CLVIII. Chapter of Unfastening the Opening in the Sky. Thoth Does It So That It May Be Finished When He Opens the Sky with Aten.
CLIX. Chapter of Causing a Flame to Arise Under the Head of the Deceased.
CLX. Chapter of Not Letting the Body Decay in the Netherworld, Rescuing from the Devourers of Souls, and Saving Flesh and Bones from Worms and Evil Gods.
CLXI. Another Chapter.
CLXII. Chapter of Landing and Not Being Obscured, So the Body May Prosper in Drinking Water.
CLXIII. Chapter of the Pillow.
CLXIV. Chapter of Bringing an Eye.
CLXV. Chapter of Raising the Funereal Bed.
CLXVI. Chapter of Arranging the Funereal Bed.
CLXVII. Chapter of Wrapping the Deceased in a Pure Garment.
CLXVIII. Beginning of the Chapter of Reciting the Ceremonies Made in the Netherworld.
CLXIX. The Addresses of Horus to His Father When He Goes to See Him and When He Comes Out of His Great Sanctuary.
CLXX. Chapter of Causing the Chu to Come Out of the Great Door in the Sky.
CLXXI. Chapter of Not Dying a Second Death in the Netherworld.
CLXXII. Chapter of Raising the Chu, Vivifying His Soul in the Netherworld.
CLXXIII. Chapter of Raising the Body, Giving It Eyes, Ears, and Affixing Its Head.
CLXXIV. Chapter of Coming Forth When Going Out of Yesterday and Coming in the Present Day, Being Equipped by One's Own Hands.
CLXXV. Chapter of Coming Forth by Day, Giving Praise to Ra in the Amenta, Paying Homage to the Inhabitants of the Tuat, and Opening the Way to the Mighty Soul in the Afterworld.
CLXXVI. Chapter of Arriving Before the Divine Circle of Osiris and the Gods, Taking the Form of a Living Soul, and Praising Osiris.
CLXXVII. Book of Vivifying Osiris, Giving Air to Him Whose Heart is Motionless, Through the Action of Thoth, Who Repels the Enemies of Osiris.
CLXXVIII. Adoration to Osiris, Giving Him Praise, Bowing Down Before Unneferu, and Exalting Him Who is on His Sand.
CLXXIX. Chapter of Being Near Osiris.
CLXXX. Giving Praise to Osiris, Falling on the Earth Before the Lord of Eternity, and Propitiating the God with What He Loves.
CLXXXI. Adoration to Hathor, the Lady of the West, Falling Down Before Mehurit.

**Introduction**

When Sir Peter Le Page Renouf began publishing his translation of the Book of the Dead in 1892, he intended to include an elaborate introduction. This introduction would provide information about the book's form, history, and religious value. However, Renouf's work remained unfinished, and we are left without notes or clues about the intended introduction. To understand his views, we must refer to his Hibbert lectures from 1879.

The Book of the Dead is not a single, unified book. It is a collection of texts that evolved over time, with parts dating back to the Old Empire. The texts of the Middle Empire show various editions, and some chapters are attributed to a king of the 1st dynasty. Over centuries, the original text was modified and expanded, with new chapters added and revisions made. The book's various parts remained independent, similar to the Hebrew Psalms. The acceptance of one chapter did not imply the acceptance of the next, and it seems that the relatives of the deceased chose chapters from the collection.The Book of the Dead, before the 26th dynasty, was a collection of texts chosen by the deceased's relatives based on their preferences and budget. During the Saite period, a comprehensive revision was made, establishing a more consistent order and adding new chapters (162-165). This version, though not strictly enforced, became widely accepted. Glosses were introduced, and the number of textual variants decreased compared to earlier periods.

In 1842, Lepsius published a significant papyrus from the Turin Museum, calling it the "Book of the Dead," a term that replaced Champollion's "Ritual," which was inaccurate. The Book of the Dead is not a ritualistic text; it contains prayers and hymns spoken by the deceased, not by priests. The Egyptian title, "pert m hru," is challenging to translate, with Renouf suggesting "coming forth by day," though "coming out of the day" might be more accurate.

Renouf highlighted the difficulties in translating the text due to its simplicity, brevity, and corruption over time. Errors arose from careless scribes and the oral transmission of chapters. Some chapters were as obscure to ancient Egyptians as they are to us. Despite progress in understanding the text, many parts remain unclear, and Renouf's translation, while a significant step forward, still contains passages that may seem nonsensical to modern readers.

The Book of the Dead is deeply intertwined with Egyptian mythology and abstract concepts, often expressed through metaphors. For example, the phrase "he ate his heart" likely means "he regretted sorely." Understanding these metaphors is crucial for accurate translation, but many remain elusive. Despite these challenges, Renouf's work has made the text more accessible, though it is not definitive.Renouf hesitated to translate the Book of the Dead, a task he viewed as the pinnacle of his Egyptological work. He believed the book aimed to glorify the deceased in three ways:

1. **Renewed Earthly Existence**: The deceased enjoys a life similar to their earthly one, with the ability to use their limbs, eat, drink, and fulfill all physical needs. Sometimes, Gods assist them, enhancing their well-being and pleasure. The afterlife's bliss is mainly depicted through the joys of agricultural life.

2. **Transformation**: The deceased can traverse the universe in any form they choose, assuming any appearance they desire. These transformations are voluntary and not mandatory.

3. **Identification with Osiris and Other Gods**: The deceased is often identified with Osiris, as indicated by the prefix "Osiris" before their name. They may also be associated with other Gods, such as in Chapter 42, where each limb is linked to a different deity. This Osirian identity empowers the deceased to overcome numerous adversaries.

Additionally, the book promises the deceased complete preservation from dismemberment and decay. This concern likely stems from a time when bodies were dismembered during burial, a practice the deceased found horrifying. The frequent prayers for body reconstitution and assurances against losing any part highlight the importance of an intact body for afterlife existence. This belief underpins the practice of mummification, as decay was seen as the ultimate threat to the body's integrity.

The Book of the Dead's core teachings likely originated in Heliopolis, an ancient city with deep religious traditions. Some chapters may have come from Abydos priests, but Heliopolis is considered the primary source.

**Chapter I**: This chapter, titled "The Beginning of the Chapters of Coming Forth by Day," includes words that bring about resurrection and glory, and describe entering and exiting Amenta. It is recited on the day of burial for the victorious deceased, who speaks to the Bull of Amenta, identifying themselves with Thoth, the eternal king, and other Gods who aid Osiris in triumphing over adversaries.

The deceased claims kinship with Osiris and Horus, participating in rituals and festivals, and ensuring their soul's entry into the house of Osiris. They request the same privileges as other beneficent souls, such as receiving bread and beer, and having unobstructed access to the house of Osiris. The deceased's soul is found to be balanced and free of wrongdoing.

**Notes on Translation**: The text used for this translation is from the papyrus of Huneferu, dating back to the XIXth dynasty. The title "Chapter of coming to the divine Powers attached to Osiris" is common in older manuscripts. The divine Powers mentioned are the children of Horus, depicted standing on a lotus beneath Osiris's throne.

The words "raising" and "glorifying" are central to the text, indicating resurrection and the bestowal of glory. The deceased's body and soul are described as being raised and given life in the Netherworld, with the body being restored to its full faculties. The term "glorious" applies to both sound and light, reflecting the deceased's elevated status in the afterlife.The Book of the Dead, 5

There are, indeed, variations in the title of Chapter 17, but some of these variations are considered incorrect. The words "remember" and "confer glory" have different origins and meanings. The latter is used in religious rituals where priests identify the deceased with Osiris and other Gods. Many tomb paintings depict priests performing these rituals.

M. Deveria has shown that "ci Jiiadt-heru" means "victorious, triumphant," but the translation "veridiqiue" is incorrect. "Heru" means "voice," not "speech." In a passage from Chapter 181, "S^ I V" signifies "failure." "S^ I V\\ QA fiiailt heru" means "one whose voice is Law," a divine title, not used for living mortals. The translation "juste de voix" limits the concept to one of its secondary meanings. "Sema'at heru" is a divine act performed by Thoth through his utterances.

The particle "an" is a demonstrative, not a preposition or verb. It is used like the Latin "en" or Hebrew "hinne." For example, in the phrase "It is Thoth who is here," "an" is a demonstrative particle, not implying a verb. Egyptologists should recognize that Egyptians did not conceive verbs as we do.

The Bull of Amenta is Osiris. "Bull," like "Lion" or "Hawk," is a figurative name for Gods or kings. Osiris is sometimes depicted with a Bull's head.

The word "T'afat" is often mistranslated as "judges." Divine judges are called "t'afat," but the term is not exclusive to them. Every God and Goddess had their "t'afat," and all ancient Egyptian towns had their divine judges. In Egyptian mythology, no God stood alone; every God's actions involved others.

The "sfbmi" are enemies of the "Sjtn," either as Ra or Osiris. This name likely personifies dark clouds.

"Het Sant," or "House of the Prince," is the great Sanctuary at Heliopolis. Many geographical locations in the Book of the Dead have counterparts in the Egyptian heaven.

"Rec/iii" is a locality in northern Egypt. The mourners and weepers mentioned are mainly Isis and Nephthys.

"Teshtesh" is one of Osiris's names, possibly referring to his molten image.

The God "whose heart is motionless" is Osiris.

"Re-stau" is one of the gates of the Netherworld, specified in Chapter 17, line 19.

"Sechem" is Letopolis, where Osiris's arm was deposited when his other limbs were scattered across Egypt.

The "Tank of Flame" is where the sun rises or sets, as depicted in papyrus vignettes.

"Tenait" is the feast of the seventh day of the month.

The speaker assumes the roles of various priests, performing religious ceremonies. Egyptian priests had divine titles, and their ceremonies symbolized the Gods' acts.

The text here is corrupt. The translation follows Ag. Instead of "exalt," some manuscripts have "anoint with oil." The Turin text might be translated as "I lustrate with water in Tattu and with oil in Abydos, exalting him who is in the heights." The word "beq" means "clear, bright, shining," and the olive tree's name derives from this. The term "I make bright, illustrious, glorious" is used for the Sun in Chapter 17.

This might be said by the "Arch-seer" priest at Heliopolis.

One of Osiris's titles is "Ba," which might mean "Ram," as he was worshipped in this form in the Mendesian Nome. The word "ba" signifies "power, force," and is used for both the soul and the ram. The ram is called "ba" for its headbutting force, and the heron is called "ba" for its fish-cleaving bill. The word "ba" is not onomatopoeic but signifies "digging through, cleaving, piercing, splitting." The hieroglyphic variants are expressive of this concept.

The "sem" and "ura herp hem" were priests serving Ptah. The latter, the high priest of Ptah at Memphis, often combined his office with that of the "seftt." The ceremony involved a grand procession around Ptah's sanctuary, carrying the God's coffin on a sledge. "Sokaru" means "the coffined," and Ptah Sokaru is a form of Osiris. Details of the ceremony are in M. Mariette's Abydos, with King Seti I depicted as a Sem priest.

"Suten-henen" was called Heracleopolis by the Greeks.

The word "sej>" means "turn" and has various meanings like the Latin "vices." Later versions of this chapter include more petitions. The deceased asks to appear before the Lord of the Gods, attain the region of Madt, rise as a living God, shine like the divine host in heaven, and be one of them. They request to see the ship of the holy Sahu (Orion) in the sky, not be prevented from seeing the lords of the Tuat (Netherworld), smell the sacrificial offerings, and sit with the divine host. They ask for the Cher-heb to make invocation over their coffin, hear propitiation prayers, and for the divine ship Neshemet to advance for them, without their soul and its possessor suffering repulse. An invocation to Osiris follows.### The Book of the Dead, Chapter 17

There are variations in the title of Chapter 17, but some are incorrect. The words "remember" and "confer glory" have different origins and meanings. The latter is used in religious rituals where priests identify the deceased with Osiris and other Gods. Many tomb paintings depict priests performing these rituals.

M. Deveria has shown that "ci Jiiadt-heru" means "victorious, triumphant," but the translation "veridiqiue" is incorrect. "Heru" means "voice," not "speech." In a passage from Chapter 181, "S^ I V" signifies "failure." "S^ I V\\ QA fiiailt heru" means "one whose voice is Law," a divine title, not used for living mortals. The translation "juste de voix" limits the concept to one of its secondary meanings. "Sema'at heru" is a divine act performed by Thoth through his utterances.

The particle "an" is a demonstrative, not a preposition or verb. It is used like the Latin "en" or Hebrew "hinne." For example, in the phrase "It is Thoth who is here," "an" is a demonstrative particle, not implying a verb. Egyptologists should recognize that Egyptians did not conceive verbs as we do.

The Bull of Amenta is Osiris. "Bull," like "Lion" or "Hawk," is a figurative name for Gods or kings. Osiris is sometimes depicted with a Bull's head.

The word "T'afat" is often mistranslated as "judges." Divine judges are called "t'afat," but the term is not exclusive to them. Every God and Goddess had their "t'afat," and all ancient Egyptian towns had their divine judges. In Egyptian mythology, no God stood alone; every God's actions involved others.

The "sfbmi" are enemies of the "Sjtn," either as Ra or Osiris. This name likely personifies dark clouds.

"Het Sant," or "House of the Prince," is the great Sanctuary at Heliopolis. Many geographical locations in the Book of the Dead have counterparts in the Egyptian heaven.

"Rec/iii" is a locality in northern Egypt. The mourners and weepers mentioned are mainly Isis and Nephthys.

"Teshtesh" is one of Osiris's names, possibly referring to his molten image.

The God "whose heart is motionless" is Osiris.

"Re-stau" is one of the gates of the Netherworld, specified in Chapter 17, line 19.

"Sechem" is Letopolis, where Osiris's arm was deposited when his other limbs were scattered across Egypt.

The "Tank of Flame" is where the sun rises or sets, as depicted in papyrus vignettes.

"Tenait" is the feast of the seventh day of the month.

The speaker assumes the roles of various priests, performing religious ceremonies. Egyptian priests had divine titles, and their ceremonies symbolized the Gods' acts.

The text here is corrupt. The translation follows Ag. Instead of "exalt," some manuscripts have "anoint with oil." The Turin text might be translated as "I lustrate with water in Tattu and with oil in Abydos, exalting him who is in the heights." The word "beq" means "clear, bright, shining," and the olive tree's name derives from this. The term "I make bright, illustrious, glorious" is used for the Sun in Chapter 17.

This might be said by the "Arch-seer" priest at Heliopolis.

One of Osiris's titles is "Ba," which might mean "Ram," as he was worshipped in this form in the Mendesian Nome. The word "ba" signifies "power, force," and is used for both the soul and the ram. The ram is called "ba" for its headbutting force, and the heron is called "ba" for its fish-cleaving bill. The word "ba" is not onomatopoeic but signifies "digging through, cleaving, piercing, splitting." The hieroglyphic variants are expressive of this concept.

The "sem" and "ura herp hem" were priests serving Ptah. The latter, the high priest of Ptah at Memphis, often combined his office with that of the "seftt." The ceremony involved a grand procession around Ptah's sanctuary, carrying the God's coffin on a sledge. "Sokaru" means "the coffined," and Ptah Sokaru is a form of Osiris. Details of the ceremony are in M. Mariette's Abydos, with King Seti I depicted as a Sem priest.

"Suten-henen" was called Heracleopolis by the Greeks.

The word "sej>" means "turn" and has various meanings like the Latin "vices." Later versions of this chapter include more petitions. The deceased asks to appear before the Lord of the Gods, attain the region of Madt, rise as a living God, shine like the divine host in heaven, and be one of them. They request to see the ship of the holy Sahu (Orion) in the sky, not be prevented from seeing the lords of the Tuat (Netherworld), smell the sacrificial offerings, and sit with the divine host. They ask for the Cher-heb to make invocation over their coffin, hear propitiation prayers, and for the divine ship Neshemet to advance for them, without their soul and its possessor suffering repulse. An invocation to Osiris follows.

### Invocation to Osiris

"Hail to thee, Prince of Amenta, Osiris, lord of Nifura; grant that I may advance in peace towards Amenta, and that the Lords of Tasert may receive me and say to me, 'Salutation! Salutation! in Peace!' Let them make for me a seat by the Prince of the divine Powers, let the two Chenemta Goddesses [Isis and Nephthys] receive me, in presence of Unneferu, the Victorious. Let me be a follower of Horus in Re-stau, and of Osiris in Tattu. Let me assume all forms for the satisfaction of my heart in every place that my Genius (Ka) wishes."

The following rubric is found as early as the XIXth dynasty in connection with this chapter, but it seems to have originally been attached to Chapter 72:

"If this discourse is learned upon earth, or is written upon the coffin, the deceased may come forth upon every day that he pleases and again enter his house without impediment. And there shall be given to him bread and beer and flesh meat upon the table of Ra: he shall receive allotment in the Fields of Aarru [the Elysian fields of Egyptian mythology], and there shall be given to him there wheat and barley, for he shall be flourishing as when he was upon earth."

Chapter I is followed in M. Naville's edition by another, which the learned editor calls I B. This chapter is found in so very few copies that the text cannot as yet be restored. The two texts published by M. Naville differ widely from each other. It was known, however, down to the Roman period, though not inserted into copies of the Book of the Dead. It is called Chapter of Introducing the Mummy into the Tuat on the day of burial. The 124th chapter bears a similar title. The word here translated mummy is probably not to be understood of the visible mummy, but of the living personality which it enclosed.

The chapter opens with an invocation:

"Hail to thee, who art in the sacred region of Amenta, the Osiris, [the deceased] knows thee and thy name, defend him from those Worms which are in Restau, who live upon the flesh of men and swallow their blood."

The names of the Worms were given, but in consequence of the gaps in the text, they cannot now be recovered. The chapter finishes with prayers in which the deceased identifies himself with Horus, who has taken possession of the throne which his father has given him; he has taken possession of heaven, and inherited the earth, and neither heaven nor earth shall be taken from him, for he is Ra, the eldest of the Gods. His mother suckles him and offers him her breast, which is on the horizon at Dawn.

### Vignette to Chapter IX

### Chapter II: Coming Forth by Day and Living After Death

"Oh thou Only One, who shinest from the Moon, let me come forth amid that train of thine, at large, and let me be revealed as one of those in glory. And when the Tuat is opened to the Gods, let N come forth to do his pleasure upon earth amid the Living."

Notes: This chapter occurs in only two of the ancient manuscripts collated by Naville: Ae and Pf. It is also found in the papyrus of Ani.

1. "Unicus," the Sole and Only One, is one of the many appellatives of the Sun. He is here represented as shining from the Moon.
2. "Multitude, throng, train," here put for the "heavenly host," the "akronos astron xlos" (Euripid., Fr 596), or the Hebrew "DiDlTn."
3. "Forth, out of doors, at large," in opposition to enclosure in the tomb.
4. "Disclose, unfold, reveal, make clear."
5. Or "among the Glorious ones."

### Chapter III: Another Chapter Like It

"Oh Tmu, who proceedest from Ur-henhenu, who art resplendent as the Lion-faced, and who strewest thy words to those who are before thee; Here cometh the faithful N, from the band of those who do the bidding of thy words. O ye seamen of Ra at the gloaming of the day, let N live after death, like Ra daily. Here the helmsman: As Ra is born from Yesterday, so he too is born from Yesterday, and as every God exulteth in life, so shall N exult even as they exult in life. I am Thoth as he goeth forth from the House of the Prince in Heliopolis."

Notes: The only ancient copy of this chapter is in the papyrus of Amen-neb (Ae), and here it is imperfect.

1. A personification of the Nile. The later texts read "the great Goddess in the Water."
2. The later texts have "implying the two lions Shu and Tefnut." But the older texts have a single God, with a lion's face or form. The two notions, however, are found in combination in the Pyramid texts of Unas (1. 558) and Teta (1. 332).
3. See note 8 on Chapter I.

### Chapter IV: Another Chapter, for Traveling on the Road Which is Above the Earth

"It is I who travel on the Stream which divideth the divine Pair, I am come, let there be given to me the lands of Osiris."

Notes: This fourth chapter has not as yet been found in any of the papyri of the best period.

1. Literally "weeping," "flood of tears," hence "overflow, inundation, stream or canal." It is one of the names of the Nile on earth and in heaven and of his personification as a God. See Chapter 61, and F.S.B.A., XIII, p. 8 and 9.
2. The two divinities in opposition or contrast, like Set and Horus (Chapter 17, 25) or the sister Goddesses named Merta (37, i). Thoth is the umpire between Set and Horus (Darkness and Light) and mediates between them, but he and Ra (the Moon and Sun) are spoken of as the two Rehu Gods traveling over the sky.

### Chapter V: Chapter Whereby Work May Not Be Imposed Upon a Person in the Netherworld

"Here is N. He saith, I am he who raiseth the hand which is motionless, and I come forth at the hour. I am the living Soul, and there go before me the longings of those who bring salutation."

Notes: This chapter is found in several of the best manuscripts, but the text is extremely corrupt, and must have become absolutely unintelligible. The Turin text differs greatly from that of the older copies, and the transposition of words clearly shows how little the transcribers understood what they were writing. I follow chiefly the text of Aa, the papyrus of Nebseni.

1. These words only occur in the later copies.
2. The older reading, but seems to be the more correct.
3. The oldest text must have had simply the ideographic "Ba," but Fd has "Hnemu." The "living Soul" is that of the Sun, whether he is called Ra or Osiris.
4. "Desires, wishes, loves," literally, "hearts."
5. "Salute," as in Chapter 12, i, and 14, i. The "saluter," is the name of the Ape who is seen in the vignettes of the papyri saluting the rising of the sun. See M. Naville's Todienbuch, I, plates 21 and 22; the Papyrus of Ani, plate 2; the Todienbuch of Lepsius, Chapters 16 and 126.

### Chapter VI: Chapter Whereby the Funereal Statuettes May Be Made to Do Work for a Person in the Netherworld

"O Statuette there! Should I be called and appointed to do any of the labors that are done in the Netherworld by a person according to his abilities, lo! all obstacles have been beaten down for thee; be thou counted for me at every moment, for planting the fields, for watering the soil, for conveying the sands of east and west. Here am I, whithersoever thou callest me."### Chapter VII: Passing Through the Void of Apepi

"Oh, One of Wax, who captures and seizes with force, and lives off those who are still! Let me not become motionless before you, let me not be paralyzed before you, let your venom not enter my limbs, for my limbs are the limbs of Tmu. If you would not be paralyzed, let me not be paralyzed. Let your languor not enter these limbs of mine. I am the One who presides over the pole of Heaven, and the powers of all the Gods are my powers. I am he whose names are hidden, and whose abodes are mysterious for all eternity. I proceed from Tmu, and I am safe and sound."

**Notes:**
- Apepi represents the storm-cloud and is the enemy of Ra, who defeats him. Unlike Sutu, the Darkness of Night, Apepi is not deified.
- This chapter is recited during the journey of the heavenly boat through cloud ridges, depicted as the coils of a great serpent.
- The chapter was said over a wax figure of the demon.

### Chapter VIII: Opening the Tuat by Day

"The Hour reveals what the head of Thoth keeps hidden, who gives might to the Eye of Horus. I call upon the Eye of Horus, which gleams as an ornament on the brow of Ra, the father of the Gods. I am that Osiris, the Lord of Amenta, and Osiris knows his day, and that it is his lot to end his being and be no more. I am Sutu, the father of the Gods, the imperishable one. Stay, Horus, for he is counted among the Gods."

**Notes:**
- Thoth is a personification of the moon, and the relations of solar and lunar phenomena are sources of much Egyptian mythology.
- The passage is difficult but implies the transition from Light to Darkness and vice versa.

### Chapter IX: Opening the Tuat

"O Soul most mighty, here am I: I have come to see you. I open the Tuat to see my father Osiris and drive away the darkness. I am he whom he loves. I have come to see my father Osiris, to pierce the heart of Sutu, and to perform all duties to my father Osiris. I open all the paths in heaven and on earth. I am the son who loves his father, and I come as a mummified one, glorious and well-equipped. O all ye Gods and Goddesses, the path is made for me."

**Note:**
- "Soul most mighty" is a principal name of Osiris. The chapter is spoken in the person of Horus, the son of Osiris.

### Chapter X: Coming Forth Victoriously

"I come forth victoriously against the adversaries. I cleave the heaven, I open the horizon, and I travel over the earth on foot. The Glorious and the Great ones come forward to me, for I am furnished with countless Words of Might. I eat with my mouth, and I chew with my jaw; for I worship the God who is Lord of the Tuat, and that is given to me which endures amid overthrow."

### Chapter XI: Coming Out Against the Adversary in the Netherworld

"Here is the Osiris N. O Eater of his arm: away from his path! I am Ra coming forth from the horizon against his adversary, who shall not be delivered from me. I have stretched out my hand, as the Lord of the Crown, and lifted my feet. I shall not be given up; my adversary shall fall before me; he has been given up to me and shall not be delivered from me. I rise up like Horus, I sit down as Ptah, I am victorious as Thoth, and powerful as Tmu: I walk upon my feet, I speak with my mouth, searching for him who has been given up to me; he shall not be delivered from me."

**Note:**
- The Eater of his arm represents Darkness, which is destroyed by the Sun.

### Chapter XII: Entering and Coming Forth Out of the Netherworld

"Salutation to you, O Ra, who guards the secrets of the gates over this domain of Seb, and this Balance with which Ra raises up Maat daily: Here am I, who cleaves open the earth, grant that I may come and advance in age."

**Notes:**
- This chapter occurs only in Pa among the older manuscripts and is repeated as Chapter 120 in the Turin copy.
- Maat is treated as a proper name in many places.
- The sun is represented as an infant at dawn and as an aged man at sunset.

### Chapter XIII: Entering After Coming Out from Amenta

"I enter as a Hawk and come forth as a Bennu at Dawn. Let the way be made for me that I may adore Ra at the fair Amenta, and the locks of Osiris. I urge on the hounds of Horus. Let the way be made for me that I may adore Osiris, the Lord of Life."

**Notes:**
- The Bennu is a bird of the Heron kind, often mistakenly identified with the Phoenix.
- The passage is corrupt in both ancient and recent forms.

### Chapter XIV: Removing Displeasure from the Heart of the God Against the Deceased Person

"Hail to you, oh God who sends forth the Moment, who presides over all the Secret things, and protects the utterance of my words. Here is a God displeased against me; let wrong be overwhelmed and fall upon the hands of the Lord of Law. Remove the impediments in me and the evil and the darkness, oh Lord of Law, and let that God be reconciled to me, removing that which detains me from you. Oh, lord of offerings in Kenu, let me offer to you the propitiatory offering by which you live, and let me live by it and be reconciled. Let all the displeasure in your heart against me be removed."

**Notes:**
- There is a significant difference between the earlier and later texts of this chapter.
- The older texts are more intelligible, while the Turin text is largely unintelligible.
- The chapter's title has been misunderstood by former translators.### Chapter XV: Hymn I

Adoration to Ra, who rises from the eastern horizon of Heaven. Those who accompany him praise him. Here is the Osiris N, the Victorious, and he says:

"O radiant Orb, who rises each day from the Horizon, shine upon the face of Osiris N, who adores you at dawn and honors you at dusk. Let the soul of N come forth with you into heaven, journey in the Maatit boat, and finish his course in the Sektit boat until he reaches the stars in heaven."

He says, invoking his Lord, the Eternal One:

"Hail to you, Horus of the Two Horizons, who is Chepera, Self-originating. Beautiful is your rising from the horizon, enlightening the two Earths with your rays. All the Gods rejoice when they see you, the King of Heaven, with the Nebt Unnut established upon your head and the diadems of the South and North upon your brow. Thoth abides at the prow of your bark to destroy all your adversaries. Those who dwell in the Tuat come forth to meet your Majesty and gaze upon your beautiful semblance. I too come to you to be with you and see your Orb each day; let me not be detained or repulsed. Let my limbs be renewed by contemplating your glories, like all your servants, for I am one who honored you on earth. Let me reach the Land of Ages and gain the Land of Eternity, for you, my Lord, have destined them for me."

The Osiris N says:

"Hail to you who rise from the Horizon as Ra in union with Maat; you traverse heaven in peace, and all men see you as you go forward. After being concealed from them, you present yourself at the dawn of each day. Brisk is the bark under your Majesty. Your rays are upon men's faces; the golden glories cannot be told, and your beams are indescribable. The Lands of the Gods and the colors of Punit are seen in them, so men may estimate what is hidden from their faces. Alone are you when your form rises upon the Sky; let me advance as you advance, like your Majesty, without pause, O Ra, whom none can outstrip. A mighty march is yours; leagues by millions and hundreds of thousands are traveled in a small moment, and you go to rest. You complete the hours of the Night as you have measured them out. When you have completed them according to your rule, day dawns. You present yourself at your place as Ra, rising from the Horizon."

The Osiris N says, as he adores you when you shine:

"He says to you when you rise at dawn, exalting your appearance: You come forth, most glorious one, fashioning and forming your limbs, giving birth to them without labor, as Ra rising in heaven. Grant that I may attain the Heaven of eternity and the abode of your servants; let me be united with the venerable and mighty Chu of the Netherworld; let me come forth with them to see your glories as you shine at dusk, when your mother Nut enfolds you. When you turn your face to the West, my hands are in adoration to your setting as one who lives; for it is you who have created Eternity. I have set you in my heart unceasingly, who are mightier than all the Gods."

The Osiris N says:

"Adoration to you, who rise out of the Golden and give light to the earth on the day of your birth. Your mother brings you forth upon her hands, that you may give light to the whole circumference which the Solar Orb enlightens. Mighty Enlightener, who rises in the Sky and raises the tribes of men by your Stream, giving holiday to all districts, towns, and temples, and raising food, nourishment, and dainties. Most Mighty one, master of masters, who defends every abode of yours against wrong. Most Glorious one in your Evening Bark, Most Illustrious in your Morning Bark. Glorify the Osiris N in the Netherworld, grant that he may come into Amenta without defect and free from wrong, and set him among the faithful and venerable ones."

"Let him be united with the souls in the Netherworld, let him sail about in the country of Aarru after a joyful journey. Here is the Osiris N. Come forth into Heaven, sail across the firmament, and enter into brotherhood with the Stars. Let salutation be made to you in the Bark, let invocation be made to you in the Morning Bark. Contemplate Ra within his Ark and propitiate his Orb daily. See the Ant fish in its birth from the emerald stream, and see the Abtu fish and its rotations. And let the offender fall prostrate when he meditates destruction for me, by blows upon his backbone. Ra springs forth with a fair wind; the Evening Bark speeds on and reaches the Haven; the crew of Ra are in exultation when they look upon him; the Mistress of Life is delighted at the overthrow of the adversary of her Lord. See Horus at the Look-out of the ship, and at his sides Thoth and Maat. All the Gods are in exultation when they behold Ra coming in peace to give new life to the hearts of the Chu, and here is the Osiris N along with them."

[Litany]

"Adored be Ra as he sets in the Land of Life. Hail to you, who have come as Tmu, and have been the creator of the cycle of the Gods. Hail to you, who have come as the Soul of Souls, August one in Amenta. Hail to you, who are above the Gods and who lightens up the Tuat with your glories. Hail to you, who come in splendor and go round in your Orb. Hail to you, who are mightier than the Gods, who are crowned in Heaven and King in the Tuat. Hail to you, who open the Tuat and dispose of all its doors. Hail to you, supreme among the Gods, and Weigher of Words in the Netherworld. Hail to you, who are in your Nest, and stir the Tuat with your glory. Hail to you, the Great, the Mighty, whose enemies are laid prostrate at their blocks. Hail to you, who slaughter the Sebau and annihilate Apepi."

[Each invocation of this Litany is followed by]

"Give delicious breezes of the north wind to the Osiris N. Horus opens; the Great, the Mighty, who divides the earths, the great one who rests in the Mountain of the West, and lightens up the Tuat with his glories and the Souls in their hidden abode, by shining into their sepulchers. By hurling harm against the foe, you have utterly destroyed all the adversaries of the Osiris N."

### Hymn II

The Osiris N says when he adores Ra, the Horus of the Two Horizons, when setting in the Land of Life:

"Adoration to you, O Ra: Adoration to you, O Tmu, at your coming in your beauty, in your manifestation, in your mastery. You sail over the Heaven, you travel over earth, and in splendor, you reach the zenith; the two divisions of Heaven are in obeisance to you and yield adoration to you. All the Gods of Amenta are in exultation at your glory. Those whose abodes are hidden adore you, and the Great Ones make offerings to you, who for you have created the soil of earth. They who are on the Horizon convey you, and they who are in the Evening Bark transport you, and they say: 'Adoration at the approach of your Majesty, Come, Come, approach in peace. Oh to you, Welcome, Lord of Heaven, King of Akerta.' Your mother Isis embraces you, seeing in you her son, as the Lord of Terror, the All-Powerful, as he sets in the Land of Life at night. Your father Tatunen carries you, and his arms are stretched out behind you, and that which has taken place is made fast upon earth."

"Wake up from your rest, your abode is in Manu. Let me be entrusted to the fidelity which is yielded to Osiris. Come, O Ra, Tmu, be adored. Do your will daily. Grant success in the presence of the cycle of the mighty Gods. Beautiful are you, O Ra, in your Horizon of the West; O Lord of Law, in the midst of the Horizon. Very terrible are you, rich in attributes, and great is your love to those who dwell in the Tuat."

To be said when Ra sets in the Land of Life; with hands bent downward.

### Hymn III

Adoration to Tmu as he sets in the Land of Life. The Osiris N says:

"Adoration to Tmu as he sets in the Land of Life. The Osiris N says, adoring Tmu, when setting in the Land of Life and shedding his rays on the Tuat: Hail to you setting in the Land of Life, O Father of the Gods, you are united to your mother in Manu. Her two hands receive you daily. Your Majesty has part in the house of Sokaru. Exult because the doors of the Horizon are opened at your setting in the Mountain of the West. Your rays run over the earth to enlighten the dwellers in Amenta. Those who are in the Tuat worship you with loud acclaim and cherish hope when they see you daily. You grant the Gods to sit upon the earth; to those who follow you and come in your train. O august Soul, who begets the Gods and invests them with your attributes; the Unknowable, the Ancient One, the Mighty in your mystery. Be your fair face propitious to the Osiris N, oh Chepera, Father of the Gods. Freedom forever from perdition is derived through this Book, and upon it, I take my firm stand."

"He who has written it has spoken it, and his heart rests on the reward. Let there be given me armfuls of bread and drink, and let me be accompanied."The fifteenth chapter, as it appears in the later version (represented by the Turin Todtenbuch), is quite recent. It is essentially a collection of texts that were originally separate: (1) a hymn to Ra at sunrise, (2) a litany, (3) a hymn to Ra at sunset, and (4) a hymn to Tmu at sunset, followed by a statement about the spiritual significance of the document. There are no ancient copies of the last hymn, but the other three compositions are found, more or less complete, as far back as the 19th dynasty. The differences between the ancient texts show that the scribes had a lot of freedom in their compositions, suggesting they didn't have sacred and canonical documents in front of them. M. Naville found it necessary to publish four different versions of the hymn to the rising sun and three of the hymn to the setting sun. The ideas and expressions in these hymns are common in the religious texts of the 18th and 19th dynasties. In this translation, I followed the form adopted by the later version, correcting the text when necessary using copies from better periods.

1. The text of the Papyrus of Ani has been used as the basis for the translation of Hymn I. It is the only ancient text that gives the hymn in the form later acknowledged as canonical.

2. From the earliest period, the sun was depicted as traveling across the sky in a boat, called the "Mandjet" in the morning and the "Mesektet" in the evening. The stars that never set but are always above the horizon were called "akhemu-seku."

3. The word "akhemu" has often been taken as a mere negative, but it appears by itself with the sign of stars as a determinative. The term is also written with different symbols. One of the meanings of "akhemu" is "to turn," and it is not improbable that the stars received this name because of their small size compared to the Sun and Moon. They were what Horace called the "lesser lights." The Sun and Moon are referred to in Genesis 1:16 as the "Two Great Lights."

4. Both the Eastern and Western horizons are mentioned in this chapter, but "Horus of the Two Horizons" does not refer to this distinction. Whatever the Sun passes through or over is always conceived as double. The "Two Earths" simply imply the Earth as divided by the passage of the Sun above it. M. Grebaut discovered this important key to many Egyptian expressions.

5. "Kheper," like the German "Werden," primarily means "turning," hence "becoming." It never means "creating." "Kheper t'esef" is equivalent to the Greek "autophyes," and like that word, it is sometimes used for spontaneous productions of the mineral kingdom, such as salt or natron, as opposed to artificial products of the same nature. It cannot be used for plants, as they have an origin in something external to themselves.

6. The "Land of the Gods" and "Punt" refer to the countries lying east of Egypt. When it is said that Gods "come from Punt," it does not mean they are of Arabian origin, but simply that the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Daylight rise in the East. "Ex oriente Lux."

7. In many places, the divine name "Nut" has the determinative sign of the sky. This might be an oversight by the scribe or further proof that the Egyptians believed in a sky below the horizon.

8. The Ant and the Abtu are sometimes depicted beside the solar bark. From the egg of the Abtu rises the great Cat, the Sun. As "abtu," meaning "month," is phonetically similar to "abtu," the Tortoise, and the latter is characterized by its rotation, the word "abtu," whether applied to "month" or "tortoise," clearly signifies "the revolving one." Our modern words "Tortoise," "Tortue," and "Tortuga" express the turning or twisting of the creature's feet. In some texts, the word is written differently.

9. The Look-out of the ship, in Egyptian "nefrit," is written differently in the Papyrus of Ani. This variant is valuable as it explains a word whose existence has been questioned and tells us the Egyptian name for the seat of Horus at the prow of the Solar Bark.

10. The Litany translated here is from the Turin Todtenbuch. It is found, though in a very damaged condition, in the Papyrus of Nechtuamon at Berlin, a manuscript of the 19th dynasty. Another Litany, preceding Hymn I, is found in the Papyrus of Ani. It is addressed to "Osiris, the everlasting Lord, Unneferu, Horus of the Two Horizons, of many forms and mighty attributes. Ptah Sakru, Tmu in Heliopolis, Lord of the Unseen World, who built up Memphis and its Gods."

11. "The Land of Life," one of the names given to the realm of Osiris after death, is not mentioned in the earlier manuscripts of the Book of the Dead. Instead of "resting in the Land of Life," the older texts have "in Amenta" or "in life in Amenta," or "one living in Amenta."

12. The word "pai" implies going round like a wheel or in a circle, hence "going round on high with the Sun." It is used synonymously with "never" and "the first time, the beginning of time." A sacrificial cake is called "pai" because of its shape, similar to the Latin "rotundula." Like the Greek "kuklos," the word comes to signify a circle of persons. This circle is not necessarily of Gods. The Bremner Papyrus in the British Museum mentions an "apage" not only to Apepi, who was no God, and to his soul, body, ghost, shadow, and children, but also to his "entourage." The term "pai" should express the "feast of the New Moon," though there are difficulties on the subject. It also expresses the number nine. The Egyptian conception of the number nine might be because it is a round number, three times three. The same expression meaning "circle of Gods" and "nine Gods" led to the belief that the circle consisted of nine Gods, which was then expanded to groups of eighteen or twenty-seven. The best theory is given at the beginning of Chapter 17.

13. The Turin text seems better suited as the basis for the translation.14. This passage is challenging, but the readings are consistent. Brugsch translates it as "the Talisman of the Earth," and Pierret as "the salvation of the earth." Both interpretations are valid, but we need to consider the full context. The phrase literally means "the back of the earth." In Latin, we say sinus, gremiuin, and viscera terrae. The Egyptians also refer to the back of Seb, from which plants grow. In a text quoted by Duemichen, the Earth is substituted for Seb. Therefore, "Soil of the Earth" seems to be the best translation.

15. "Thy mother Isis." The Turin text has Nut, which doesn't fit with what follows. Other texts give different names like Tatunen, Tunen, or Tanen, which are associated with the God also known as Ptah, Sokru, and Osiris. Horus, the son of Osiris and Isis, seems to be addressed here.

16. This rubric is not found in older manuscripts. I regret suggesting 'Ennead' as a translation, which has caused confusion. The term itself is correct, but it has led to misunderstandings. 

17. This hymn hasn't been found in older manuscripts. A corrected text from the Louvre papyri is available in M. Lefebure's work.

18. "Chepera, father of the Gods." Such expressions can be misleading. They don't imply that 'father of the Gods' is a unique attribute of Chepera. Many Gods are referred to as 'father of the Gods' in different contexts. In Egyptian mythology, any God can be called this, similar to how any point in space can be the origin in mathematics.

19. When Lepsius divided the Book of the Dead into 165 chapters, Chapter 16 was just the Vignette of Chapter 15. The Vignettes from the Papyrus La of Leyden, showing the Rising and Setting Sun, are included in this translation. The Rising Sun is saluted by six Cynocephalous Apes and two kneeling Goddesses, identified as Isis and Nephthys. The Setting Sun is saluted by three hawk-headed and three jackal-headed divinities, the Spirits of Pu and Nechen. Below, the Sun of Yesterday and the Sun of Today are saluted by Isis and Nephthys.

20. Chapter XVII: "I am he who closeth and he who openeth, and I am but One. I am Ra at his first appearance. I am the great God, self-produced; His Names together compose the cycle of the Gods; Resistless is he among the Gods. I, who am Osiris, am Yesterday and the kinsman of the Morrow. A scene of strife arose among the Gods when I gave the command. Amenta is the scene of strife among the Gods. I know the name of the great God who is here. Herald of Kft is his name. I am the great Heron who is in Heliopolis, who presides over the account of whatsoever is and of that which cometh into being."

21. "Who is that? It is Osiris who presides over the account of all that is and all that cometh into being, that is Endless Time and Eternity. Endless Time is Day and Eternity is Night. I am Amsu in his manifestations; there have been given to me the Two Feathers upon my head."

22. "Who is that, and what are his Feathers? It is Horus, the avenger of his father, and the Two Feathers are the Urasi upon the forehead of his father Tmu. I have alighted upon my Land, and I come from my own Place."

23. "What is that? It is the Horizon of my father Tmu. All defects are done away, all deficiencies are removed, and all that was wrong in me is cast forth. I am purified at the two great and mighty Lakes at Sutenhunen, which purify the offerings which living men present to the great God who is there."

24. "Who is that? It is Ra himself. Which are the two great and mighty Lakes? The Lake of Natron and the Lake of Maat. I advance over the roads, which I know, and my face is on the Land of Maat."

25. "What is that? The road upon which father Tmu advances when he goes to the Field of Aarru, approaching the land of Spirits in Heaven. I come forth through the Teser gate."

26. "What is that? This gate of the Gods is Haukar. It is the gate and the two doors and openings through which father Tmu issues to the Eastern Horizon of Heaven. O ye who have gone before! Let me grasp your hands, me who become one of you."

27. "Who are they? Those who have gone before are Hu and Sau. May I be with their father Tmu, throughout the course of each day. I make full the Eye when it waxes dim on the day of battle between the two Opponents."

28. "What is that? The battle of the two Opponents is the day upon which Horus fights with Sut, when he flings his filth upon the face of Horus, and when Horus seizes upon the genitals of Sut, for it is Horus who does this with his own fingers. I lift up the hairy net from the Eye at the period of its distress."

29. "What is that? The right Eye of Ra in the period of its distress when he gives it free course, and it is Thoth who lifts up the net from it. I see Ra when he is born from Yesterday, at the dugs of the Mehurit cows."

30. "His course is my course, and conversely mine is his. What is that? Ra and his births from Yesterday at the dugs of the Mehurit cows? It is the figure of the Eye of Ra, at his daily birth. And Mehurit is the Eye. I am one of those who are in the train of Horus."

31. "What is that 'one of those in the train of Horus'? Said with reference to whom his Lord loves. Hail, ye possessors of Maat, divine Powers attached to Osiris, who deal destruction to falsehood, ye who are in the train of Hotepeschaus, grant me that I may come to you. Do away the wrong which is in me, as ye have done to the Seven Glorious ones, who follow after the Coffined one, and whose places Anubis hath fixed on that day of 'Come thou hither'!"

32. "Hotepeschaus is the divine Flame assigned to Osiris for burning the souls of his adversaries. I know the names of the Seven Glorious ones who follow the Coffined one, and whose places Anubis hath fixed on the day of 'Come thou hither.' The leader of this divine company, 'An-ar-ef, the Great' is his name; 2, Kat-kat; 3, the Burning Bull, who lives in his fire; 4, the Red-eyed one in the House of Gauze; 5, Fieryface which turns backwards; 6, Dark Face in its hour; 7, Seer in the Night."

33. "I am he whose Soul resides in a pair of Gods. It is Osiris, as he comes to Tattu, and there finds the soul of Ra; each embraces the other, and they become Two Souls. The pair of Gods are Horus, the Avenger of his Father, and Horus, the Prince of the City of Blindness. I am the great Cat, who frequents the Persea tree in Heliopolis, on that night of battle wherein is effected the defeat of the Sebau, and that day upon which the adversaries of the Inviolate God are exterminated."

34. "Who is that great Cat? It is Ra himself. For Sau said, He is the likeness (Maau) of that which he has created, and his name became that of Cat (Maau). The night of conflict is the defeat of the children of Failure at Elephantine. There was conflict in the entire universe, in heaven and upon the earth. He who frequents the Persea tree is he who regulates the children of Failure, and that which they do."

35. "O Ra, in thine Egg, who rises up in thine orb, and shines from thine Horizon, and swims over the firmament without a peer, and sails over the sky; whose mouth sends forth breezes of flame, lighting up the Two Earths with thy glories, do thou deliver me from that God whose attributes are hidden, whose eyebrows are as the arms of the Balance upon that day when outrage is brought to account, and each wrong is tied up to its separate block."The God with eyebrows like the arms of a balance is "he who lifts his arm." Deliver me from the Wardens of the Passages with harmful fingers, who serve Osiris. These Wardens are the Powers that fend off the adversaries of Bd. May your knives not harm me; may I not fall into your traps, for I know your names. My path on earth is with Ra, and my ultimate goal is with Osiris. Let your offerings not be against me, oh Gods on your altars! I am one of those who follow the Master, a keeper of the writ of Chepera. I fly like a Hawk, I cackle like the Smen-Goose, and I move eternally like Nehebkau.

Oh Tmu, who resides in the Great Dwelling, Sovereign of all Gods, deliver me from the God who feeds on the damned, whose face is like a hound but whose skin is human. This God, known as the Eternal Devourer, consumes shades and human hearts at the pool of fire. He is unseen. 

Oh Fearful one, ruler of the Two Earths, Red God who commands the execution block, to whom the Double Crown and the title of Prince of Sutenhunen are given. Osiris was chosen as the Leader among the Gods on the day the Two Earths united before the Inviolate God. The junction of the Two Earths is the head of Osiris's coffin, the beneficent Soul in Sutenhunen, the provider of food and destroyer of wrong, who has determined the paths of eternity. It is Ka himself. Deliver me from the God who seizes souls and consumes all filth and corruption, whether in darkness or light. Those who fear him are powerless.

Oh Chepera, who is in the midst of your bark and whose body is the cycle of the Gods forever, deliver me from the inquisitorial Wardens to whom the Inviolate God has given the task of guarding his adversaries and inflicting slaughter in the place of annihilation. May I not fall under your knives, may I not sit in your dungeons, may I not come to your places of extermination, may I not fall into your pits. May none of the things that the Gods abominate be done to me, for I have passed through the place of purification in the middle of the Meskat, where the Mesit and Tehenit cakes are given in Tanenit. The Meskat is the place of scourging in Sutenhunen, and the Tehenit is the Eye of Horus. Tanenit is the resting place of Osiris.

Tmu builds your dwelling, the Lion-faced God lays the foundation of your house as he goes his round. Horus offers purification, and Sut gives might, and vice versa. I have come upon this earth and taken possession with my two feet. I am Tmu, and I come from my own Place. Back, oh Lion with a dazzling mouth and head bent forward, retreat before me and my might. I am Isis, and you find me as I drop my hair loosely on my brow. I was conceived by Isis and begotten by Nephthys. Isis destroys what is wrong in me, and Nephthys removes what is rebellious. Dread follows me, and Might is in my hands. Countless hands cling to me. The dead and the living come to me. I defeat my adversaries' clients and spoil those with darkened hands. I have made an agreeable alliance. I have created the inhabitants of Cher-abat and those of Heliopolis.

Every God fears the Terrible, the Almighty one. I avenge every God against his oppressor, shooting my arrows at him when he appears. I live according to my will. I am Uat'it, the Fiery one. Woe to those who rise against me! What is this? "Of unknown attributes, which Hemen has given" is the name of the Funereal Chest. "The Witness of that which is Lifted" is the name of the Shrine. The Lion with a dazzling mouth and head bent forward is the Phallus of Osiris, or Ra. I, who drop the hair loosely on my brow, am Isis when she conceals herself, letting her hair fall over herself. Uat'it the Fiery is the Eye of Ra. Woe to those who rise against me; they are the associates of Sut as they approach.

The seventeenth chapter is one of the most remarkable in the collection, preserved from times before the XIIth dynasty. The earliest monuments have handed it down with scholia and commentaries interpolated into the text. Some monuments allow us to distinguish the original text from the additions, often written in red. However, only one text suppresses the additions, offering the most ancient form of the chapter, found on the wall of Horhotep's tomb. The sarcophagus of Horhotep contains a copy of the text with the additions. The chapter was already of venerable antiquity at that time. Other copies come from the sarcophagi of Hora, Sit-Bastit, Mentuhotep, and Sebek-aa, published by Lepsius. The British Museum has Sir Gardner Wilkinson's copy of the texts on Queen Mentuhotep's coffin and a fragment of a prince named Hornefru's coffin. These witnesses from the best period unfortunately do not agree, showing the progress of corruption long before. The variants are not just orthographic differences but different readings, mainly in the scholia. Even when explanations are identical, the form differs. The latest recensions retained the form, while ancient texts added equivalent words. Horhotep's text omits them altogether, showing they were additions to the text and scholia. The chapter grew more obscure, calling for new explanations. Manuscripts of the new empire provide fresh, ancient matter, though proof is lost due to the poor condition of literature before the XVIIIth dynasty. The XVIIIth dynasty inherited but did not invent the new form of the Book of the Dead, with its traditional vignettes. Later manuscripts show an authoritative recension, making the text more certain but not necessarily more true or intelligible. The notes and explanations reached their fullest extent. It would take a volume to translate all forms of the chapter. Here, the earliest forms of the text and first commentaries are given, showing the difference between text and later additions, all of extreme antiquity, some two thousand years before Moses. Later manuscripts will be referred to in the notes. The early title is simple, but from the XVIIIth dynasty, it resembles the first chapter's title, adding that the deceased "takes every form he pleases, plays draughts, sits in a flower, comes forth as a soul living after death, and is glorified for what is done on earth."

The remarkable opening of the chapter is an addition, unknown to the primitive recension on Horhotep's tomb walls but found elsewhere. The texts do not agree. "I am He who closes and He who opens, and I am but One." 'He who closes' is Tmu, 'He who opens' is Unen. As the God who closes and opens is one, 'I am but One' is a natural ending, appealing to classical and higher authority. "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord." The Egyptian meaning is clear, but readings differ due to the absence of determinatives in the oldest style. Horhotep and other texts have a compound word, possibly signifying the same.The text discusses various interpretations and translations of ancient Egyptian religious texts, particularly focusing on the "Book of the Dead." It highlights the differences in readings and meanings across different manuscripts and periods. Here's a modernized version of the content:

---

The term "closer and opener" appears in various forms across different texts. For instance, the papyrus of Nebseni uses a third-person form, which doesn't change the meaning but stands out as an isolated reading. Later versions, like the Turin Todtenbuch and the Cadet papyrus, emphasize that the "Opener" is a God. The absence of a determinative after certain symbols doesn't negate the sense of "opener," especially in mythological contexts where physical meanings are prioritized over metaphysical ones.

In my essay on the Myth of Osiris Unnefer, I discussed these meanings in detail. The later versions of the chapter, such as those found in the hieratic papyrus T. 16 of Leyden, change the opening to "I am Atmu, who made the Sky and created all that has come into being."

The later texts add an interpolation about the Sun's first appearance when Shu raised the Sky from Chemennu, destroying the "Children of Failure." This act is often depicted in pictures where Shu, the son of Ra, parts the Earth (Seb) and the Sky (Nut) at sunrise, earning the title "The Lifter up of the Heaven." Chemennu, known to the Greeks as Hermopolis, is referred to mystically here, meaning "Eight," possibly alluding to eight elemental deities.

The "children of Failure" are elements of darkness that vanish with the arrival of Day. This mythological expression appears later in genuine portions of older texts. The doctrine of Nomina Numina, asserting that the names of Ra, the Sun-God, form "the cycle of the Gods," is emphasized. These names, representing solar phenomena, are considered the limbs or members of Ra.

The papyrus of Nebseni shows the corruption of the passage "I am he who closes and he who opens, and I am but One," with later texts adding ambiguous words that could mean the God was alone "in heaven" or "as Heaven." The papyrus of Ani attempts to clarify with "I was born from Nu," but these improvements don't reflect well on the exegetical skills of Egyptian theologians.

The term "kinsman of the Morrow" literally means "I know the Morrow," with "Yesterday" representing Osiris and "Morrow" representing Ra. The earliest texts use either "speak" or "command," indicating that strife among the Gods began at Ra's bidding, symbolizing the natural forces coming into conflict.

The bird "bennu," identified with the Sun-God, is connected to the verb of motion "ben," meaning "going round." The Sun is thus called "bennu," similar to the Greek term "kuklophoros" in the Orphic hymns. The term "Unnefer" is often misinterpreted as "good being," but it more accurately means "that which is and that which is not yet."

The name "Amsu" is confirmed by various texts, despite some discrepancies in manuscripts. Horus, the avenger of his father, refers to his father as Tmu, not Osiris, in some texts. The two Feathers are often interpreted as the Eyes of the God, with Isis and Nephthys rising as two kites.

The term "rehit" refers to the present generation, contrasting with the past and future generations. The lakes mentioned in the texts are named "Eternity" and "the Great green one," representing the lake of Natron and the lake of Maat.

The gate depicted in the vignette shows the Sun-God passing through, with later explanations suggesting it was the gate Shu used to raise Heaven or the gate of the Tuat. Hu and Sau, sons of Tmu, are Solar appellatives, representing attributes like "the Nourisher" and "the Knowing One."

The Eye, representing the Sun or Moon, is obscured during an eclipse, with the "hairy net" symbolizing the shadow passing over the heavenly body. The Cat, associated with the Sun, is explained through a play on words, with the Egyptian name for the animal resembling the word for "shining."

Nehebu-kau, the son of Seb and Renenut, is linked to the verb "nehbu," meaning "to carry, sustain, support," and the plural of "ka," which can signify the divine or human spirit.

---

This modernized version aims to make the ancient text more accessible and understandable to contemporary readers.The God mentioned is one of the forty-two judges of the dead. In some versions of the Book of the Dead, he is described as coming from a source often associated with the Nile. The serpent symbol frequently used in his name further supports this identification with the Nile. The Pyramid texts describe him as "Water" and "of many windings."

The Devourer has similar functions to a strange animal called Amemit in the Psycho-Stasia pictures. Later texts add that the Devourer comes from the 'basin of Punit,' the Red Sea, and mention other names like 'Flint,' stationed at the gate of Amenta.

M. Maspero's interpretation of a word related to 'health' is confirmed by papyri, which state that Thoth not only freed the Eye from darkness but also restored it to life, health, and strength without damage.

Mehurit is explained as 'the Eye,' but it actually refers to the Sky, from which the Sun is born daily. The sign of plurality after Mehurit indicates the daily succession of skies from which Ra is born.

The 'coffined One' is Osiris, as stated in later texts. The 'Seven glorious ones' who follow the coffin are linked to the constellation of the Great Bear, which revolves around the Pole. The Polar Star is identified with Osiris's coffin. The names of these stars vary, and they also appear as the Seven Cows and their Bull in other texts.

The 'Red-eyed' cow is said to reside in a 'house of gauze,' possibly a cobweb. The papyri note that the "day of Come thou hither" represents the moment when Osiris invites Ra to join him, symbolizing their meeting in Amenta.

The term 'possessor of completeness' refers to Osiris when he is restored after being dismembered. He is called Ra-Tmu-Neberi'er in the great Harris papyrus.

Baba, described as the firstborn of Osiris, is a fearsome God from whom the deceased prays for deliverance. His name implies thorough searching or probing, akin to a miner's work, reflecting his role in the judgment of the dead.

The Mesqat is a place of scourging, associated with violent treatment by beating. In the 72nd chapter, the deceased prays not to perish at the Mesqat. The word also signifies 'a hide,' linking the concepts of flaying and punishment. Anubis, behind the chest containing Osiris's remains, is said to be the purifier in later texts.

The chapter transitions to the 18th chapter, where various speakers identify themselves as Tmu, Isis, and Uat'it, among others. These localities are in heaven, not on earth. Uat'it, the 'pale one,' refers to the Dawn, specifically the fiery dawn.

Hemen, a rarely mentioned divinity after the Middle Empire, is depicted with a Snake (the River) in his hand.

The last line of the chapter is damaged in all the best papyri. In the papyrus of Ani, the chapter is unfinished. Later papyri conclude by stating that the speaker is granted the power to destroy the souls of his adversaries by those in Tattu.

Chapter XVIII begins with the An-mdut addressing the Great Circles of Gods in Heaven, Earth, and the World below, presenting N as void of offense and seeking daily presence with the Gods. N prays for bread, the right to appear at the tables of the Lords of Maat, and the ability to enter and exit the Netherworld without repulse.

The Se-meri-f addresses the Circle of Gods in Restau, seeking bread, water, air, and an allotment in the Sechit-hotepu like Horus. N prays for an abiding place in the Netherworld and the receiving of cakes before the Gods.

A litany follows, invoking Thoth to make N triumphant over adversaries, as Osiris was, before various Circles of Gods in Heliopolis, Tattu, Sechem, Pu and Tepu, the Two Regions of Rechit, and Abydos. Each invocation references specific events and deities associated with these locations."Let N be victorious over his enemies, just as you make Osiris victorious over his enemies, before the Great Circle of Gods on the Highway of the Damned, on the night when judgment is passed on those who are no more. The Great Circle of Gods on the Highway of the Damned includes Thoth, Osiris, Anubis, and Astes. Judgment is passed on the Highway of the Damned when the case against the souls of the Children of Failure is closed.

Oh Thoth, who makes Osiris victorious over his enemies, let N be victorious over his enemies, just as you make Osiris victorious over his enemies, before the Great Circle of Gods at the Great Hoeing in Tattu, on the Night of Hoeing in their blood and ensuring Osiris's victory over his enemies. The Great Circle of Gods at the Great Hoeing in Tattu includes the associates of Sut, who take the forms of goats and are slain before the Gods there, with their blood running down, according to the judgment of the Gods in Tattu.

Oh Thoth, who makes Osiris victorious over his enemies, let N be victorious over his enemies, just as you make Osiris victorious over his enemies, before the Great Circle of Gods in An-arer-ef on the Night of Hiding him who is Supreme in Attributes. The Great Circle of Gods in An-arer-ef includes Shu, Babai, Ra, and Osiris, and the Night of Hiding him who is Supreme in Attributes is when they are at the Coffin, the Thigh, the Head, the Heel, and the Leg of Unneferu.

Oh Thoth, who makes Osiris victorious over his enemies, let N be victorious over his enemies, just as you make Osiris victorious over his enemies, before the Great Circle of Gods in Restau on the Night when Anubis lies with his hands upon the objects behind Osiris, when Osiris is made to triumph over his enemies. The Great Circle of Gods in Restau includes Osiris, Horus, and Isis. The heart of Horus rejoices, the heart of Osiris is glad, and the two Parts of Heaven are satisfied when Thoth ensures N's victory before these ten Great Circles around Ra and Osiris and the Circles of Gods attached to every God and Goddess before the Inviolate God. All his enemies are destroyed, and all that was wrong in him is also destroyed.

If the person recites this chapter, they will be purified and come forth by day after their death, taking any form they wish. If this chapter is recited over them, they will be prosperous on earth, safe from every fire, and no evil thing will approach them, with undeviating regularity for infinite times.

Notes:
The eighteenth chapter is one of the earliest copies of the Book of the Dead, found on the wooden coffins of the 'Old' and 'Middle' Empires, with the most complete ancient copy on the coffin of Queen Mentuhotep of the eleventh dynasty. It consists of a litany addressed to Thoth, invoked to secure the triumph of the departed against their enemies in the presence of the Gods of certain localities. Each petition references a mythological event and is supplemented by the enumeration of the Gods presiding at the named locality, sometimes with a short comment on the myth. The order of petitions varies in later versions, and the text has undergone other alterations. Copies of this chapter are extremely numerous, especially in later periods. The chapter begins with petitions to Thoth, with the preceding portion found only in the Papyrus of Ani. However, the vignette belonging to this portion appears in the great Leyden Papyrus of Kenna, indicating the text was not confined to a single manuscript. It is particularly valuable for illustrating the ritual use of portions of the Book of the Dead.

The deceased is presented to the Gods by two priests in succession, one called An-maut-ef and the other Se-meri-f. Both names are titles of Horus, and it is common for Egyptian priests to bear divine titles, with their ritual observances being dramatic and symbolic representations of the actions of the Gods. An-maut-ef literally means 'column (support) of his mother.' Horus is called 'the An-maut-ef of the Great Company of the Gods' and 'the An-maut-ef of Osiris.' Se-meri-f means 'the Beloved Son,' and the priest of this name personified Horus in his dutiful offices to his father Osiris. The translation of 'the son who loves him' instead of 'the son he loves' is incorrect, as the correct meaning is 'the son he loves.'

The word 'Circle of Gods' is a collective noun, never found in any other sense. The ancient form renders it probable that the later form is not phonetic but ideographic of roundness. This concept is found in the word for 'head' or 'top of the head,' akin to the Latin vertex, from the same root as vertere. The sign, which often appears as the determinative in later texts, originates from the cursive form of carelessly written. Instead of the word for 'wall,' we also find a sign that is ideographic of enclosure. This word occurs in the Pyramid Texts under the form, which M. Maspero translates as 'the Great Enclosure of On.' The etymological relationship to the Coptic word for 'head' has led some scholars to translate the Egyptian word as 'chiefs, princes,' but these are secondary applications of 'head.' The word implies an association of persons, hence the translation as 'Circle of Gods.'

The Eve's Provender is a corruption of the ancient term, which had probably ceased to be intelligible. According to the pantheistic system, the deceased, through identification with the Sun, absorbed and consumed all that came in their way, expressed in a somewhat brutal style. Men and Gods disappear before Unas, who makes his breakfast at dawn on great Gods, his dinner on Gods of middling quality, and his supper at even on minor deities. The word for 'things' has a wide application, frequently meaning 'property, estate,' and sometimes 'suit.'

On the last day of the month of Choiak, the great solemnity of setting up the Tat as the symbol of Osiris was observed down to the latest periods. The tablets of Pasherenptah, high priest of Ptah at Memphis, speak of this great dignitary as the king's deputy in 'Raising the Tat.' Brugsch has published a picture showing Amenophis III helping to raise the Tat, with the queen Ti and the royal princesses taking part in the ceremony. The procession is described as marching four times around the sanctuary of Ptah-Seker-Osiris.

Horus in the Dark, or Blindness, or Invisibility, is mentioned in my note.

Pu and Tepu are named together in the earliest texts as one locality, recognized by Brugsch as the metropolis of the northern nome called by the Greeks.

The feast derives its name from the words 'Come thou to me,' said of a legendary incident. The early papyri read, but this is no objection, as the sign is the determinative of the entire group giving its name to the feast.

The dead refers to those who have died 'the second death.'

The vignette from the now lost Papyrus Busca represents 'the Great Hoeing in Tattu.' The long text at Dendera contains directions for the festival commemorating the ancient myth. Two black cows are put under a yoke of wood, the plough is of tamarisk wood, and the share of black bronze. The plougher goes behind, with a cow led by a halter. A child with a lock attached to its head scatters the seed in the field of Osiris, a piece of land with given dimensions. Barley is sown at one end, spelt at the other, and flax between the two. The Cher-heb in chief recites the Office for the Sow."Chapter XIX: The Crown of Triumph

Your father, Tmu, has prepared for you this beautiful Crown of Triumph, a living diadem loved by the Gods, so you may live forever. Osiris, Prince of Amenta, ensures your victory over your enemies. Your father, Seb, has decreed you as his heir, to be celebrated as Triumphant, Horus, son of Isis and Osiris, on the throne of your father Ra, through the defeat of your adversaries. He has granted you the Two Earths, unconditionally. Atmu and the Cycle of the Gods have repeated the glorious act of Horus's triumph, son of Isis and Osiris, forever.

Osiris, Prince of Amenta, unites the Two Parts of Heaven. All Gods and Goddesses in heaven and on earth join in ensuring the Triumph of Horus, son of Isis and Osiris, over his enemies before the Great Circle of Gods in Heliopolis. Horus proclaims this four times, causing all adversaries to fall, be overthrown, and slaughtered. Their abode is transferred to the slaughtering block of the East, where they are decapitated, their necks crushed, and their thighs cut off, given to the great Annihilator in the Valley, ensuring they never escape Seb's custody.

This chapter is recited over a consecrated crown placed on the deceased's face, with incense on the flame, ensuring their triumph over all adversaries, dead or alive, making them a follower of Osiris. They will receive food and drink in the presence of this God. Recite it at dawn twice; it offers great protection with unwavering regularity for infinite times.

Notes:
The nineteenth chapter is a recent version of the eighteenth, with manuscripts dating back to the Greek period. It originates from the practice of placing garlands or floral crowns on mummies. The mummy of Aahmes I, the first king of the eighteenth dynasty, was found with a garland of pretty pink Delphinium flowers around its neck. Remains of such crowns are found in museums. For more details, refer to Dr. Pieyte's paper, "La Couronne de la Justification," in the second volume of the Transactions of the Oriental Congress held at Leyden in 1884.

Chapter XX: Another Chapter of the Crown of Triumph

This chapter is a tabulated form of chapter 18, with the rubric. The person should recite this chapter and purify themselves with natron water. They will come forth by day after death, take any form they wish, and escape from the fire, with unwavering regularity for infinite times. The earliest example of this tabulated form is found on the Berlin Sarcophagus of Mentuhotep.

Chapter XXI: The Mouth of a Person in the Netherworld

Hail to you, Lord of Light, Prince of the House encircled by Darkness and Obscurity. I come to you glorified and purified. My hands are behind you; your portion is that of those who have gone before you. Give me my mouth so I may speak with it and guide my heart in its hour of Darkness and Night.

Notes:
The oldest papyrus containing this chapter is that of Ani. The translation is based on it, but the text differs from those on the ancient coffins of Pleru and Set-Bastit, copied by M. Maspero, and from later texts. The second paragraph seems to be spoken by the God, while the first and third are from the deceased. "My hands are behind you" implies protection. On the coffins, the invocation is addressed to "one whose head is clothed with radiant white, of the House of Darkness and Obscurity." The ancient text continues, "Come to me, glorified and purified; let your hands shine with your head. Give me my mouth."

Chapter XXII: Another Chapter of the Mouth in the Netherworld

I shine forth from the Egg in the unseen world. Let my mouth be given to me so I may speak with it in the presence of the great God, Lord of the Tuat. Let not my hand be repulsed by the Divine Circle of the great God. I am Osiris, Lord of Restau, at the head of the Staircase. I come to do the will of my heart, out of the Tank of Flame, which I extinguish when I come forth.

Notes:
This chapter belongs to the earliest epoch and is one of those copied by Wilkinson from the coffin of Queen Mentuhotep. In the Papyrus of Ani, it is followed by chapter 21 as its conclusion, and both chapters are appended to chapter 1 before its rubric. The Egg in the unseen world is the Sun's globe below the horizon. The 17th chapter addresses "Ra in your Egg, who rises in your orb, and shines from your Horizon."

Chapter XXIII: The Mouth of a Person in the Netherworld

Let my mouth be opened by Ptah, and let the muzzles on my mouth be loosed by the God of my domain. Let Thoth come, equipped with Words of Power, and let him loose the muzzles of Sutu on my mouth. Let Tmu lend a hand to fling them at the assailants. Let my mouth be given to me. Let my mouth be opened by Ptah with the steel instrument he uses to open the mouths of the Gods. I am Sechit Uat'it, who sits on the right side of Heaven. I am Sahit, encircled by the Spirits of Heliopolis. All the Words of Power and accusations against me are countered by the Gods, unitedly.

Notes:
1. Osiris. The term "God of the domain" refers to Osiris at Abydos.
2. The word translated as "steel" is discussed in M. Deveria's dissertation, "Le Fer et l'Aimant." The Ceremonies of the Opening of the Mouth at the tomb are described in the Introduction to this translation.
3. The Goddess's name is phonetically written as Sechit.Chapter XXIV: Words of Power in the Afterlife

I am Khepera, self-created, on my Mother's thigh. The speed of bloodhounds is given to those in Heaven, and the spirit of hyenas to those in the Divine Circle. I gather my Words of Power from every corner, more persistently than hounds of chase and more swiftly than Light. O you who guide Ra's Bark, your rigging is sound and free from disaster as you pass to the Tank of Flame. I collect my Words of Power from every corner, for everyone it concerns, more persistently than hounds of chase and more swiftly than Light. These Words of Power create Gods from Silence or reduce them to inactivity, and impart warmth to the Gods.

Notes:
This chapter is ancient, found on the coffins of Horhotep and Queen Mentuhotep. The translation adheres closely to the oldest texts, though they are not entirely trustworthy. The term "thigh" is usually translated this way, aligning with depictions of the Goddess Nut as the Sky with the divine Scarab. The word also signifies running water, a river, or a canal. The names of the animals in the texts vary, but they imply speed or ferocity. The term "ferocity" here means high, unbridled spirit, not something negative. The Bennu bird appears in later texts, but earlier ones use a different word implying tenacity or obstinacy, virtues of a high order. The idea of Silence as the origin of Gods is also found in Greek thought and early Gnostic beliefs.

Chapter XXV: Remembering One's Name in the Afterlife

Let my name be given to me in the Great House. Let me remember my name in the House of Flame on the Night when the Years are counted and the Months are reckoned. I am He who dwells in Heaven and sits on the Eastern side of Heaven. If any God does not follow me, I will utter his name at once.

Notes:
Every Egyptian Temple symbolized Heaven, with its Great House and House of Flame as the most sacred areas. The Great House occupied a central position, like the Lady Chapel in cathedrals, and the House of Flame stood beside it.

Chapter XXVI: Receiving the Heart in the Afterlife

He says: Heart of mine, come to me in the place of Hearts! Whole Heart of mine, come to me in the place of Whole Hearts! Let me have my Heart so it may rest within me. I will feed on the food of Osiris on the eastern side of the meadow of amaranthine flowers. Give me a boat for descending the stream and another for ascending. I go down into the boat where you are. Give me my mouth to speak, my feet to walk, and my arms to overthrow my adversaries. Let two hands from the Earth open my mouth. Let Seb, the Erpa of the Gods, part my jaws, open my eyes, and give motion to my hands. Let Anubis give strength to my legs so I may stand. Let Sechit the divine one lift me up so I may rise in Heaven and issue my commands in Memphis. I possess my Heart, my Whole Heart, my arms, and my legs. I do whatever my Genius wills, and my Soul is not bound to my body at the gates of Amenta.

Notes:
The Egyptian texts have two names for the Heart, often used synonymously but sometimes distinguished. The term "Heart" is connected with lively motion, similar to the Greek and Indo-European terms for heart. The word also denotes the heart with the lungs attached. The term "whole heart" is used to describe this. The phrase "meadow of amaranthine flowers" refers to a plant mentioned in medical prescriptions and sacred texts, identified with the Coptic amaranth. The term "Erpa" is a title for Seb, the keeper of the deceased, and cannot be translated without losing its original meaning.Chapter XXVII: Keeping the Heart in the Afterlife

O Gods who seize hearts and pluck out whole hearts, and who reshape a person's heart based on their deeds, let my heart be forgiven by you. Hail to you, Lords of Everlasting Time and Eternity! Do not tear my heart from me with your fingers. Do not reshape my heart based on the evil things said against me. This heart of mine is the heart of the God of mighty names, the great God whose words are in his members, and who gives free course to his heart within him. His heart is the most insightful among the Gods. Heart of mine, I possess you, I am your master, and you are with me; do not fall away from me. I am the one you must obey in the Netherworld.

Notes:
1. There is significant variation between manuscripts from different periods. The translation of certain terms has evolved over time, with some older texts omitting particles found in later versions. The God of mighty names is Thoth, and later texts refer to him as the great God in Hermopolis.
2. The term "new, fresh, young, vigorous" is used in some readings.

Chapter XXVIII: Keeping the Heart in the Afterlife

O Lion-God! I am Unbu, and I abhor the block of execution. Do not let my whole heart be torn from me by the divine champions in Heliopolis! O you who clothe Osiris and have seen Sutu, you who turn back after smiting him and have accomplished the overthrow, this whole heart of mine remains weeping over itself in the presence of Osiris. Its strength comes from him, obtained through prayer. I have been granted the glow of heart at the hour of the God of the Broad Face and have offered sacrificial cakes in Hermopolis. Do not let my whole heart be torn from me. I entrust its place to you and stir your whole hearts towards it in Sechit-hotepit and the years of triumph over all it abhors, taking all provisions at the appointed time from your hand. This whole heart of mine is laid upon the tablets of Tmu, who guides me to the caverns of Sutu and gives me back my whole heart, which has accomplished its desire in the presence of the divine Circle in the Netherworld. Let those who find the sacrificial joint and funereal raiment bury them.

Notes:
1. Unbu is a name of the solar God, associated with the hawthorn or another flowering bush. The term "golden Unbu" appears in the Pyramid Texts.
2. Divine champions are depicted with various determinatives, indicating different qualities.
3. The term "clothe" has multiple meanings, and the context usually determines the correct one. Some manuscripts provide additional determinatives for clarity.
4. The end of this chapter is considered unintelligible, with many variations in manuscripts. The text is likely corrupt, with scribes mixing different recensions without regard to grammatical sense.
5. Tablets or records are mentioned, with the term appearing in the Pyramid Texts in the sense of memory.
6. The last words of the chapter puzzled later scribes, who altered them in various ways. The older manuscripts refer to the sacrificial joint, not a verb as later scribes thought.

Chapter XXIX: Keeping the Heart in the Afterlife

Back, Messenger of your God! Are you here to take this whole heart of mine by force? But I will not surrender this heart of the living to you. The Gods regard my offerings and fall upon their faces on their own earth.

Notes:
The two oldest copies of this chapter are found on the coffins of Aniamu and Horhotep. The papyrus of Ani is the only early period text where it occurs. None of these texts is perfect, with parts missing or misplaced. Later scribes exercised their ingenuity, changing terms and adding negatives to make sense of the text.
1. The term "Messenger" is used here in the same sense as an angel or ambassador of God.
2. The term "by violence" appears in other religious texts.
3. "The Living" refers to those saved, in opposition to the dead and damned.

Chapter XXIX B: Another Chapter of the Heart; upon Carnelian

I am the Heron, the Soul of Ra, who conducts the Glorious ones to the Tuat. It is granted to their souls to come forth upon the Earth to do whatever their Genius wills. It is granted to the soul of the Osiris N to come forth upon the Earth to do whatever his Genius wills.

Note:
Certain chapters related to the heart were written on gems and served as amulets. This chapter was written on Carnelian and is not often found in papyri. M. Naville found copies in the Berlin Papyrus of Nechtuamen and another traced by Lepsius in Rome. A third copy is in the papyrus of Ani in the British Museum, with some variations.

Chapter XXX A: Keeping the Heart in the Afterlife

Heart mine, which is that of my Mother, Whole Heart mine, which was that of my coming upon Earth, let there be no estoppel against me through evidence; let no hindrance be made to me by the Divine Circle; let there not be a fall of the scale against me in the presence of the great God, Lord of Amenta. Hail to you, Heart mine; Hail to you, Whole Heart mine; Hail to you, Liver mine! Hail to you, Gods who are on the side lock, conspicuous by your scepters, announce my glory to Ra and convey it to Nehabkau. And though he be buried in the deep grave and bowed down to the region of annihilation, he is glorified there.

Chapter XXX B: Keeping the Heart in the Afterlife

Heart mine, which is that of my Mother, Whole Heart mine, which is that of my birth, let there be no estoppel against me through evidence; let no hindrance be made to me by the Divine Circle; do not fall against me in the presence of him who is at the Balance. You are my Genius, who is with me, the Artist who gives soundness to my heart.Chapter XXXI: Repelling Crocodiles in the Afterlife

Back off, Crocodile Sui! Do not come near me, for I live by the Words of Power. I speak the Name of the great God, who sends two of his Messengers: one named Batta and the other named "Your Aspect is Fixed Law." Heaven sets its time, and my Words of Power control everything related to it. My mouth speaks my Words of Power. I eat, and my teeth are like flint, my grinders like the Cliff of Tuf. You who watch over my Words of Power, do not take them away, O Crocodile who lives by your own Words of Power.

Notes:
1. The Words of Power are given to the deceased by Thoth in Chapter 23.
2. Some texts read "Do not you speak," implying the Crocodile might use the Words of Power.
3. The name Batta was later changed to the divine Ape Beni.
4. "Fixed Law" represents the central idea of regularity in the Book of the Dead.
5. "Determines" here means setting limits or defining.
6. "The Cliff of Tuf" refers to Anubis, often called "His Cliff."
7. "Sitting" is interpreted from various texts.

Chapter XXXII: Repelling Crocodiles in the Afterlife

Osiris stands up, supported by his Gods. O Son who speaks with your father, protect this Great one from these four crocodiles who devour the dead and live by the Words of Power. I know their names and ways, and I protect my father from them.

Back, Crocodile of the West, who lives on the Setting Stars. You have devoured Osiris's head, but I am Ra. Back, Crocodile of the East, who lives on those who consume their own filth. I have come, and I am Osiris. Back, Crocodile of the South, who lives on impurities. Let not the red flame be upon you, for I am Septu. Back, Crocodile of the North, who lives on what lies between the hours. Let not your fiery water harm me, for I am Tmu.

All things that exist are in my grasp, and those that are not yet depend on me. I am equipped with your Words of Power, O Ra, with what is above and below me. I have gained length, depth, and fullness of breath within my father's domain. He has given me the beautiful Amenta, where the living are destroyed but its possessor remains strong. My face is unveiled, and my heart is in its place. The Uraeus is upon me daily. I am Ra, who protects himself, and no evil can overthrow me.

Notes:
1. The chapter is in poor condition, with few early manuscripts available.
2. The ancient text mentioned only four crocodiles, but later texts mention eight.
3. The myth suggests that stars setting are swallowed by the Crocodile of the West.
4. Instead of Ra, later texts mention Sut.
5. "Septu" is a name found in various texts.Chapter XXXIII: Keeping Serpents Away

Stop, serpent Rerek! Seb and Shu are here. If you don't, you'll eat the rat Ra despises and gnaw the bones of a rotten cat.

Notes:
1. This chapter is often found in coffins. A similar chapter is in Horhotep's tomb, mentioning Rerek and Shu but not the rat and cat. These animals symbolize the impurities the damned face in the afterlife.

Chapter XXXIV: Avoiding the Shrine Dweller

O Urgeus! I am the Flame that shines and opens eternity, the column of Tenpua with blossoming plants. Stay away! I am the Lynx Goddess.

Notes:
1. The meaning of "Urgeus" is unclear. The text has many variations, and the scribes often altered it.
2. "Open out Eternity" is the oldest and most accepted reading.
3. Tenpua is likely a misreading. The text suggests another deity, but it's uncertain.
4. The Lynx Goddess, Maftit, represents swift speed and is mentioned in other chapters as fighting the dragon of darkness.

Chapter XXXV: Avoiding Serpents in the Underworld

Oh Shu, here is Tattu, under Hathor's wig. They scent Osiris. The serpent Seksek passes over me. Here are bruised wormwood and reeds. Osiris prays to be buried. The Great One's eyes are downcast, cleansing and balancing the issues.

Notes:
1. "Wig" refers to the Gods' head-dress, symbolizing light clouds at sunrise or sunset.
2. "Scent" can also mean nursing or putting to sleep.
3. The early texts are inconsistent and hard to translate.
4. "Bruised" can mean either guard or beat down.
5. "Cleansing" is generally understood as washing.
6. "Balancing the issues" refers to the circumstances of one's life.

Chapter XXXVI: Keeping the Apshait Away

Stay away, you with parted lips! I am Chnemu, the Lord of Shennu, bringing the Gods' words to Ra and announcing the news to Nebes.

Notes:
1. The Apshait is likely a voracious insect, not a tortoise as previously thought. The last word of the chapter is uncertain, with variations in different texts.

Chapter XXXVII: Keeping the Merta Goddesses Away

Hail, Merta Goddesses! I inform you of my Words of Power. I rise from the Sektit boat. I am Horus, son of Isis, here to see my father, Osiris.

Notes:
1. Merta signifies two eyes, representing Isis and Nephthys.

Chapter XXXVIII: Living by the Breath of Air in the Netherworld

I am the God in Lion form, heir of Ra and Tmu in Chemnis, the Master in their halls. Those in their cells guide me. I travel the heavenly Ocean on Ra's Bark, uttering his words to the living and the breathless. I spy for Ra at sunset, compressing my mouth and feeding on life. I live in Tattu, repeating my life after death like the Sun daily.

Notes:
1. There are two versions of this chapter. The one translated here is the canonical version found in later manuscripts.
2. Chemnis is where Isis gave birth to Horus.Chapter XXXIX: Repelling the Serpent Rekrek in the Underworld

Back off, stabber from Apepi! Drown in the lake of Heaven, where your father ordered your demise. Stay away from this birthplace of Pa, the God surrounded by his terrors. I am Ra, surrounded by his terrors. Back off, dark demon, and the sword you wield! Ra casts down your words; the Gods twist your face; the Lynx Goddess tears out your heart; the Scorpion Goddess chains you; and Maat deals the final blow. The Gods on the roads overthrow you. Apep, the enemy of Ra, falls.

You who remove the bolt from the East of Heaven at the stormy voice of bellowings, and open the gates of the Horizon before Ra: he comes forth fainting from the wounds. I am a doer of your will, O Ra. I have done well, to your satisfaction. I raise shouts of acclamation at your success in fettering Apep. Apep is fallen and in bonds. The Gods of the South, North, West, and East bind him; their bonds are upon him. Aker overthrows him, and the lord of the ruddy sky binds him. Ra is satisfied; Ra makes his progress peacefully. Apep falls; Apep goes down, the enemy of Ra.

Be emasculated, O Apep, enemy of Ra; be repulsed whom Ra hates; look behind you: a chopper is over your head to divide it into two parts, and those above your head assail it. Your bones are broken, your limbs are severed under Aker's direction, O Apep, enemy of Ra. Your boatmen, O Ra, succeed in measuring out your path, and a journey with which you are satisfied; a progress towards home; and the progress you have made towards home is fair. Let no evil hindrances come forth against me from your mouth in what you do towards me. I am Sutu, who causes storms and tempests, and who goes round the Horizon of Heaven, like one whose heart is veiled.

Tmu says: Let your countenances be raised up, soldiers of Ra, and drive back Nebtu in the presence of the Divine Circle. Seb says: establish those who are upon their thrones in the middle of the Bark of Chepera; seize your shields and spears, and hold them in your hands. Hathor says: Seize your daggers. Nut says: Come and drive back Nebtu, who comes against him who dwells in his shrine, and makes his voyage in solitary guise: the Inviolate God, the resistless one. O Gods in your Divine cycles, who travel round the lake of Emerald, come and defend the Great one who is in the shrine from which all the Divine cycle proceeds. Let glory be ascribed to him, and let honor be given to him. Oh then, proclaim him with me.

Nut says, the mother of the Gods: He comes forth and finds his path, and makes captures of the Gods; he has the first place in the two houses of Nut. Seb stands still, the great cycle of the Gods is in terror, Hathor is under terror, and Ra is triumphant over Apep.

Notes:
1. The text is extremely uncertain, making any translation conjectural.
2. Aker: The God Aker is imagined as a tunnel starting from where the sun sets and extending through the earth to where the sun rises. Each end of the tunnel has a sphinx-like form, with a human-headed lion at both the entrance and the terminus. The solar bark enters on the Western horizon and comes out on the Eastern.
3. The proof: The term "taste" is used metaphorically to mean a probe or test. In Egyptian texts, a hero's hand is said to "taste" his enemy, similar to the Homeric concept of tasting one's enemy in battle.

Chapter XL: Repelling the Eater of the Ass

Back, serpent Haiu, whom Osiris curses. May Thoth cut off your head, and may I gain whatever property comes from you as decreed by the Gods for your slaughter. Back, you whom Osiris curses, from the Neshemet galley, which sails south with a favorable breeze. Pure are you, all Gods who overthrow the enemy of Osiris. The Gods on the larboard side shout loudly. Back, Eater of the Ass, whom the God Chas in the Tuat curses. Know me! (Repeated four times).

"Who are you?" I am "Down upon your face!" you who eat at my sanctuary. I am the Season, which comes at its own will. "Come not against me; you who come uncalled and unknown." I am the master of your utterance and the check on your pride. O Ha-as, whose horns Horus cuts: by my children, the cycle of Gods in Pu and Tepit, you are severed from your fold and your fold is severed from you. And he who cuts you off comes forth as the Eye of Horus; you are kept back and stopped by the breath of my speech.

O God who devours all wrong and carries off with violence; there is no wrong in me, my tablets are free from wrong. Let me not suffer violence before the Divine Circle; let not disaster be hurled upon me. I am he who gives or takes according to your behest. Let not iV be seized, let him not be devoured. He is Possessor of Life and Sovereign Lord on the Horizon.

Notes:
1. The translation is based on the important papyrus T 5 of Leyden, known as Lb, the only manuscript containing the whole chapter.
2. The Eater of the Ass is a serpent, but the "Ass" symbolizes something specific, not the animal itself.Chapter XL: Repelling the Eater of the Ass

Back off, serpent Haiu, cursed by Osiris. May Thoth cut off your head, and may I gain whatever is decreed by the Gods from your defeat. Back off, you who Osiris curses, from the Neshemet galley, which sails south with a favorable breeze. Pure are you, all Gods who overthrow Osiris's enemy. The Gods on the larboard side shout loudly. Back off, Eater of the Ass, cursed by the God Chas in the Tuat. Know me! (Repeated four times).

"Who are you?" I am "Down upon your face!" you who eat at my sanctuary. I am the Season, which comes at its own will. "Come not against me; you who come uncalled and unknown." I am the master of your utterance and the check on your pride. O Ha-as, whose horns Horus cuts: by my children, the cycle of Gods in Pu and Tepit, you are severed from your fold and your fold is severed from you. And he who cuts you off comes forth as the Eye of Horus; you are kept back and stopped by the breath of my speech.

O God who devours all wrong and carries off with violence; there is no wrong in me, my tablets are free from wrong. Let me not suffer violence before the Divine Circle; let not disaster be hurled upon me. I am he who gives or takes according to your behest. Let not iV be seized, let him not be devoured. He is Possessor of Life and Sovereign Lord on the Horizon.

Notes:
1. The translation is based on the important papyrus T 5 of Leyden, known as Lb, the only manuscript containing the whole chapter.
2. The Eater of the Ass is a serpent, but the "Ass" symbolizes something specific, not the animal itself.

Chapter XLI: Avoiding Slaughter in the Netherworld

O Tmu, let me be glorified in the presence of the God in Lion form, the great God; that he may open to me the gate of Seb. I prostrate myself to the great God who is in the Netherworld. Let me be introduced into the presence of the company of Gods who preside over those in Amenta. O you who are at the gate of Tebat; God with the Red Crown, who is in Amenta; let me feed, let me live by the breath of air and accompany the great Cleaver and the Bark of Chepera. Let me speak to the divine Boatman at the gloaming, let me enter in and let me go out; that I may see who is there; that I may raise him up and speak my words to him. O Breathless one: Let me live and be saved after death. O Bearer of peace offerings, who opens your mouth for the presentation of the tablets, for the acceptance of the offerings and for the establishment of Maat upon her throne; let the tablets be brought forward, and let the Goddess be firmly established. I am Osiris, the great God, the eternal king, who numbers his seasons and who lifted up his right arm, who judges the great ones and gives mission to the Gods of the great Circle which is in the Netherworld.

Notes:
1. The most noteworthy difference between the older recension of this chapter and that of the Saitic and later periods is that in the latter the God addressed at the opening is Osiris Unneferu, who is identified with Tmu. In the older recensions, the identification may be seen in another way. Tmu is the God invoked, and in answer, he says that he is Osiris, the great God.
2. God with the Red Crown is one of the titles of Osiris with the crown. This title, derived from the crown, is Net-td or Nait-td. It was borne by the high priest at Coptos, and the King of Egypt derived his title from the Crown of the North which he wore as representing Osiris, or rather the heir of Osiris, Horus.
3. The great Cleaver, the name of the God who cleaves his path through the sky.
4. Breathless one, Osiris.
5. Thoth is the person here addressed, and the speaker is Osiris. The tablets are those containing the evidence at the trial at the Balance.
6. Acceptation, besides the physical sense of comprehendere, 'to lay hold of with the hands,' has that of 'taking in, embracing with the mind,' and perhaps 'setting forth in words.'
7. On the Sarcophagus of Seti, and the other copies of the same text, there is a picture of these Gods. The text speaks of them as the Gods of the great Circle.

Chapter XLII: Preventing Slaughter at Sutenhenen

Land of the Rod, of the White Crown of the Image, and the Pedestal of the Gods. I am the Babe. (Said Four Times.) O Serpent Abur! You say this day, "The Block of Execution is furnished with what you know," and you come to soil the Mighty One. But I am he whose honors are abiding. I am the Link, the God within the Tamarisk, who connects the Solar orb with Yesterday. (Four Times.) I am Ra, whose honors are abiding. I am the Link, the God within the Tamarisk.

My course is the course of Ra, and the course of Ra is my course. My hair is that of Nu, my two eyes are those of Hathor, my two ears those of Apuat, my nose that of Chenti-chas, my two lips those of Anubis, my teeth those of Selkit, my neck that of Isis, the Mighty, my two hands those of the Soul most Mighty, Lord of Tattu, my shoulders those of Neith, Mistress of Sais, my back is that of Sut, my phallus that of Osiris, my liver is that of the Lords of Cher-abat, my knees those of the most Mighty one, my belly and my back are those of Sechit, my hinder parts are those of the Eye of Horus, my legs and thighs those of Nut, my feet those of Ptah, my nails and bones those of the Living Uraei. There is not a limb in me which is without a God. And Thoth is a protection to my flesh. I shall not be grasped by my arms or seized by my hands. Not men or Gods, or the glorified ones or the damned; not generations past, present, or future, shall inflict any injury upon me. I am he who comes forth and proceeds, and whose name is unknown to man. I am Yesterday, "Witness of Eternity" is my Name: the persistent traveler upon the heavenly highways which I survey. I am the Everlasting one. I am felt and thought of as Chepera. I am the Crowned one. I am the Dweller in the Eye and in the Egg. It is an attribute of mine that I live within them. I am the Dweller in the Eye, even in its closing. I am that by which it is supported. I come forth and I rise up: I enter and I have life. I am the Dweller in the Eye; my seat is upon my throne, and I sit conspicuously upon it. I am Horus, who steps onwards through Eternity.

I have instituted the throne of which I am the master. As regards my mouth: whether in speech or in silence, I am right and fair. As regards my attributes: I hasten headlong, I the God Unen, with all that pertains to me, hour proceeding from hour, the One proceeding from the One, in my course. I am the Dweller in the Eye; no evil or calamitous things befall me. It is I who open the gates of Heaven; it is I who am master of the throne, and who open the series of births upon this day. I am the Babe, who treads his path of Yesterday. I am "This Day" to generation of men after generation. I am he who gives you stability for eternity, whether you are in heaven or upon earth; in the South or in the North, in the West or in the East, and the fear of me is upon you. I am he who fashions with his eye, and who does not die a second time. A moment of mine belongs to you, but my attributes belong to my own domain. I am the Unknown one, but the Gods of Ruddy Countenance belong to me. I am the Gladsome one, and no time has been found, but served to create for me the Heaven and the increase of Earth, and the increase of their offspring. They sever and join not; they sever my name from all evil things, according to the words which I say unto you. It is I who rise up and shine forth; strength proceeding from strength, the One proceeding from the One. There is not a day devoid of that which belongs to it; forever and forever. I am Unbu, who proceeds from Nu, and my mother is Nut. O you who have set me in motion! for I was motionless, a mighty link within the close of Yesterday; my present activity is a link within the close of my hand.I am Horus, the eternal prince, a flame that ignites your hearts towards me. I am the master of my throne, moving forward. The present is the path I have cleared, freeing myself from all evil. I am the golden Cynocephalus, three palms high, without limbs, in the Temple of Ptah. My journey mirrors that of the golden Cynocephalus. Let these words be spoken: Ababak ter-ek.

Notes:
This chapter is crucial for understanding Egyptian mythology. The speaker identifies with the Sun God, representing the eternal Sun of Yesterday, Today, and Forever, "One proceeding from the One."

1. Sutenhenen: Later texts refer to this as the "Netherworld."
2. The Babe: A term for the rising Sun, symbolizing something "lifted up."
3. Serpent Ab-ur: A viper known for causing intense thirst, possibly due to its habit of waiting by water sources.
4. To soil: An earlier term replaced in later texts.
5. The Link: A title for the Sun God, symbolizing connection and order.
6. The God within the Tamarisk: The rising Sun often depicted in a tree or bush, symbolizing the light cloud or mist at dawn.
7. Who connecteth: Likely refers to a rope or bond, symbolizing connection.
8. Identification of limbs: The deceased's body parts are associated with various Gods, a common theme in Egyptian texts.
9. Strength: Literally a wall or tower.
10. Continuously: Repeated for emphasis.
11. The interjection implies addressing a second person.
12. Recent copies mention the Sanctuary of Ptah at Memphis.
13. Ababa-k ter-ek: A formula with various interpretations.

CHAPTER XLIII: Ensuring one's head is not severed in the Netherworld
I am a Prince, the son of a Prince; a Flame, the Son of a Flame, whose head is restored after being cut off. Osiris's head is not taken, and neither will mine. I rise, renew, and grow young again. I am Osiris.

CHAPTER XLIV: Preventing a second death
Let the Cavern of Putrata be opened for me, where the dead fall into darkness, but the Eye of Horus supports me, and Apuat raises me up. I hide among the Stars that never set. My front is Ra, my face revealed by Thoth's words; my heart and speech are intact. I am Ra, not to be ignored or molested. Your father lives for you, O Son of Nut! I am your son Horus, seeing your mysteries and crowned as King of the Gods. I do not die a second time in the Netherworld.

CHAPTER XLV: Escaping corruption in the Netherworld
Here is Osiris, motionless like Osiris; let his limbs not remain motionless or corrupt. They move not, they stir not: let it be done for me as for Osiris. I am Osiris.

CHAPTER XLVI: Ensuring the living are not destroyed in the Netherworld
Oh, recent offspring of Shu, who dawn after dawn possesses his diadem at sunrise; future generations of men, my emergence is that of Osiris.

Note: This chapter addresses the offspring of Shu, who are future generations of men, not yet lived on earth. They circle the Sun before appearing on earth, and the glorified dead converse with them. The Egyptians believed in the preexistence of souls as part of their traditional creed.

CHAPTER XLVII: Ensuring one's seat is not taken in the Netherworld
Chair and Throne of mine, coming to me and circling around me; divine ones!

I am a noble Sahu, grant that I may follow the great God. I am the Son of Maat, and I abhor wrong. I am the Victorious one.

Note: Sahu is not a mummy but a living personality in mummified form.

CHAPTERS XLVIII and XLIX are identical to X and XI respectively.

CHAPTER L: Avoiding the divine Block of Execution
The four fastenings of the back of my head are secured. He in heaven made them firm for the fainting one on the day the fleece was shorn. Sutu and the Gods secured the fastenings in his first triumph. Let there be no disaster. Preserve me from him who slew my father. I am seized.### Chapter LI: Avoiding Falling in the Netherworld

I reject it, I reject it, I do not consume it. What I reject is filth. I do not eat it to appease my spirit. Let me not fall into it; let me not touch it with my hands, let me not step on it with my sandals.

**Note:** Chapters 51 and 52 are not found in the oldest papyri, but their essence and formulas appear on ancient coffins and in the Pyramid texts. Contrary to some interpretations, these texts do not suggest that the deceased will only have excremental matter to eat and drink in the afterlife. Instead, they express the Sun-God's abhorrence of such matter, as he is a consuming fire that devours everything in his path.

### Chapter LII: Avoiding Eating Filth in the Netherworld

I reject it, I reject it, I do not consume it. What I reject is filth. I do not eat it to appease my spirit. Let it not fall upon me; let me not touch it with my hands, let me not step on it with my sandals. Let me live on corn in your presence, Gods, and let someone bring me the seven loaves for Horus and the loaves for Thoth. "What will you eat?" the Gods ask. Let me eat under the Sycamore of Hathor the Sovereign, and let my turn be given among those who rest there. Let me manage the fields in Tattu and prosper in Heliopolis. Let me eat the bread of white corn and drink the beer of red barley. Let the forms of my father and mother be granted to me, the gatekeepers of the stream. Let the path be made clear for me, and let me sit wherever I desire.

**Notes:**
1. The later texts often contain errors, such as misreading certain words.
2. The term "corn" should be corrected from unintelligible forms in later texts.
3. The forms of the deceased's parents are mentioned in the Turin Book of the Dead and other texts.

### Chapter LIIIa: Avoiding Eating Filth or Drinking Lye

I am the sharp-horned Bull, who regulates the sky, the Lord of the risings in heaven; the great Giver of Light, who emerges from Flame; the Bond of Time, richly supplied with years; the God in Lion form, to whom is given a march of Glory. I reject it, I reject it, I do not consume what my spirit rejects. Let it not enter my stomach, let it not touch my hands, let me not step on it with my sandals. Let me not drink lye, let me not advance headlong in the Netherworld. I possess bread in Heliopolis, bread in Heaven with Ra, and bread on earth with Seb. The Sektit boat has brought it from the house of the great God in Heliopolis. I am gladdened in my very entrails and am associated with the divine mariners who circle to the East of Heaven. I eat as they eat, and I feed on what they feed. I eat bread from the house of the Lord of offerings.

### Chapter LIIIb: Avoiding Eating Filth

I reject it, I reject it! I do not consume it. Filth is what I reject; I do not eat it. I reject lye, I do not drink it. Let me not touch it with my fingers, let me not step on it with my sandals. Seb, the father of Osiris, has ordained that I should not eat filth or drink lye, but my father has four times said that I should eat of the red corn. There are seven loaves in Heaven at Heliopolis with Ra, seven loaves on earth with Seb, and seven loaves with Osiris. The God of the Sektit galley and the Maatit galley has brought them to me at Heliopolis. I shout with joy, and my spirit shouts with joy because I am in Heliopolis, living in excellent condition before Ra, on the day when bread is presented in Heliopolis.

**Note:** Chapter 53A is from older papyri, while 53B is an even older text from the Coffin of Horhotep.

### Chapter LIV: Receiving Air in the Netherworld

I am the God in Lion form, the Egg in the Great Cackler, and I watch over that great Egg which Seb has separated from the earth; my Life is the Life thereof, and the same is true of my advance in life and my breathing of the air. I am the God who maintains balance as his Egg circles around. For me dawns the moment of the most mighty one, Sut. O Gods who are pleasant through the alternate successions of the Earth, who preside over sustenance and live in the Blue, watch over him who abides in his Nest; the Infant God who comes forth towards you.

**Notes:**
1. The text followed here is from Pa, which is preferable to that of Ani.
2. The God in Lion form is not mentioned in Horhotep, where the chapter begins differently.
3. The egg springs from the back of Seb, not from the earth.
4. The equilibrium of forces is maintained by the revolution of the Sun.
5. The Blue refers to lapis lazuli, a term that has different connotations in ancient and modern contexts.### Chapter LV: Another Chapter for Receiving Air

I am the Jackal of jackals, I am Shu, who brings breezes to the Glorious One, reaching the ends of the sky, the earth, and the filaments of clouds. I provide air to the young ones as I open my mouth and gaze with my two eyes.

**Notes:**
1. The "Glorious One" is often read as Ra.
2. "Filaments of clouds" refer to the long, fibrous forms of cirrus clouds.

### Chapter LVI: Another Chapter of Breathing

Oh Tmu, give me that refreshing air from your nostrils. I hold the great station in the heart of Heracleopolis. I watch over the egg of the Great Cackler, my strength is its strength, my life is its life, and my breath is its breath.

### Chapter LVII: Breathing Air and Commanding Water in the Netherworld

Let the Great One be opened to Osiris; let the two folding doors of Kabhu be thrown wide to Ra. O great Coverer of Heaven, in your name of Stretcher of Heaven, grant me command of water, just as Sut commands force on the night of the Great Disaster. Let me prevail over those who preside at the Inundation, just as the venerable God prevails over them, whose name they do not know. May I prevail over them. My nostril is opened in Tattu, and I rest in Heliopolis, my dwelling, built by the Goddess Seshait and raised by Chnum.

If the sky is at the North, I sit at the South; if the sky is at the South, I sit at the North; if the sky is at the West, I sit at the East; and if the sky is at the East, I sit at the West. By raising my eyebrows, I pierce through to any place I desire.

**Notes:**
1. The Great One refers to Heaven.
2. Kabhu is another name for the Sky.
3. The Coverer refers to both the Nile and the Sky.
4. Stretcher may also mean "Cleaver of the Sky."
5. Force, like the Latin "vis," may not necessarily be criminal.
6. The Goddess Seshait is often misnamed as Safkh.
7. Raising eyebrows signifies scornful pride.

### Chapter LVIII: Breathing Air and Commanding Water

Let the door be opened to me! Who are you? What is your name? I am one of you! Who is with you? It is the Merta. Turn away then, face to face, upon entering the Meskat. He grants that I may sail to the Abode of those who have found their faces. Collector of Souls is the name of my Bark, Bristler of Hair is the name of the Oars, Point is the name of its Hatch, Right and Straight the name of the Rudder. The picture of it represents my glorious journey upon the Canal. Give me jars of milk, cakes, and meat at the House of Anubis. If this chapter is known, he enters after having gone out.

**Notes:**
1. Merta refers to the Goddess pair Isis and Nephthys.
2. Meskat or Meschenit is another reading.

### Chapter LIX: Breathing Air and Commanding Water

Oh Sycomore of Nut, give me the water and wind within you. I hold the abode in Heracleopolis, I watch over the Egg of the Great Cackler. My strength is its strength, my life is its life, and my breath is its breath.

**Notes:**
1. The mythological tree in heaven produces both wind and water, akin to the rain-cloud.

### Chapter LX: Another Chapter

Let the doors of Heaven be open to me, let the doors of Kabhu be thrown wide to me; by Thoth and Hapi, the great Coverer of Heaven, at daybreak. Grant me command of water, just as the mighty Sut commanded his enemies on the Day of Disaster to the Earth. May I prevail over the Long-armed ones in their corners, just as the glorious and ready God prevails over them, whose name they do not know. May I prevail over the Long-armed ones.

### Chapter LXI: Another Chapter

I am he who proceeds from the Weeper, whose attribute is Overflowing. I have command of it as Hapu.

**Notes:**
1. The great Weeper is primarily Heaven.
2. The Nile God also bears the same name.

### Chapter LXII: Drinking Water in the Netherworld

Let the Great One be opened to Osiris; let the Kabhu be thrown wide to Thoth, the Coverer, Lord of the Horizon, in his name of the Divider of the Earth. May I have command of the water, just as the might of Sutu had over his enemies. I traverse the Heaven: I am Ra, the God in Lion form, the Steer. I eat the haunch and pierce through the joint. I go around the Sechit-Aarru. Eternity without end is assigned to me. I am the Heir of Endless Time, and my attribute is Eternity.

**Notes:**
1. The Steer is a solar title frequent in the Pyramid texts.

### Chapter LXIIIa: Not Burned by Fire, Drinking Water in the Netherworld

O Bull of Amenta, let me be borne to you! I am the Rudder of Ra, conveying the Ancient ones. I am not burned, I am not consumed. I am Babai, the eldest son of Osiris, who strikes the eye of every God in Heliopolis. I am the Heir, the primary power of motion and rest.

### Chapter LXIIIb: Not Boiled in Water

I am the ready Rudder wherewith Ra conveys the Ancient ones, raising the effluxes of Osiris to the Tank from impassable flames; a wrecked one, but not to be consumed. I lie helpless as a dead person and arrive at the lair of the Lion who defies slaughter, following the road by which I set out.

**Notes:**
1. Chapters 63A and 63B are often combined in later manuscripts.### Chapter LXIV: Emerging from the Netherworld

I am Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow, reborn again and again. I possess the unseen Force that creates the Gods and provides sustenance to those in the Tuat, the western realm of Heaven. I am the Eastern Rudder, the Lord of Two Faces, who sees by his own light. I am the Lord of Resurrections, emerging from the dusk, born from the House of Death.

Oh divine Hawks on your gables, who attentively watch over the matter, you who accompany the bier to the tomb and guide Ra's ship from the highest place in the Ark of Heaven, the Lord of the Shrine in the Earth's centerI am He, and He is I. My radiance is the light in which Ptah floats over his firmament.

Oh Ra, who smiles cheerfully and whose heart delights in the perfect order of this day as you enter Heaven and rise in the East, the Ancients and those who have gone before acclaim you. Make your paths pleasant for me; widen your ways for me to traverse the earth and the expanse of Heaven. Shine upon me, oh gracious Power, as I approach the divine words my ears shall hear in the Tuat. Let no pollution from my mother be upon me; deliver and protect me from him who closes his eyes at twilight and ends in darkness.

I am the Overflower, and Kam-ura is my name. I bring to fullness the hidden Force within me. Oh Great One, who is Shoreless and calls upon the Powers of the South when the God is carried forth, saying: "Behold the Lord of his Flood; see, the Shoulder is fastened upon his neck and the Haunch upon the head of the West," offerings which the two Goddesses of the West present to me when the weeping bursts forth from me at what I witness, as I am borne around on the Tenait in Abydos, and the bolts on the gateways above your images are within your reach.

Your face is like that of a hound whose nostril sniffs at the covert to which my feet convey me. Anubis is my bearer, for he who lulls me to rest is the God in Lion form. Save me! I am He who comes forth as one who breaks through the door; everlasting is the Daylight created by his will.

"I know the deep waters" is my name. I satisfy the desires of the Glorified, who are by millions and hundreds of thousands. I am the guardian of their interests, actively working at the hours of the day and adjusting the arms of Sahu; twelve in circling round, uniting hands, each with another. The sixth of them in the Tuat is the 'Hour of the overthrow of the Sebau,' which comes here in triumph; the same which makes way into the Tuat; the same which is yoked with Shu.

I shine forth as the Lord of Life and the glorious order of this day: the blood which purifies and the vigorous sword-strokes by which the Earth is unified. I sever the horns from those who unite in resistance to me; the hidden ones who rise up in opposition against me; those who go upon their bellies. I come as the ambassador of the Lord of lords to avenge the cause of Osiris in this place. Let not the Eye consume its tears. I am the Guide of the house of Him who dwells in his treasures. I come from Sechem to Heliopolis to inform the Bennu of the matters of the Tuat.

Oh Goddess Aucherit, who conceals what is within you but raises up forms like Chepera, grant that I may come forth and see the orb of the sun, and walk forth in the presence of the great God, who is Shu and abides for eternity. I travel on high, I tread upon the firmament, I raise a flame with the daylight which my eye has made, and I fly forward towards the splendors of the Glorified in the presence of Ra daily, giving life to every man who treads on the lands upon the earth.

Oh you who leap forth, conductor of the Shades and Glorified ones from the Earth, let the fair path to the Tuat be granted to me, made for those in faint condition and for the restoration of those in pain. Who are you, who devours in Amenta? I am He who presides in Restau. "He who enters in his own name, and comes forth in quest; the Lord of the Eternity of the Earth" is my name. She who has conceived has set down her burden; which turns round before descending; the door is shut at the wall which is reversed.

His Eye has been given to Horus and his face brightens at the dawning of the day. I am not exhausted: I become the Lion God and the palm flowers of Shu are upon me. I am not one who drowns. Blessed are they who see the Bourne; beautiful is the God of the motionless heart who causes the stay of the Overflowing. Behold! there comes forth the Lord of Life, Osiris your support, who abides day after day. I embrace the Sycomore, I am united to the Sycomore. I part the two deities of morning that I may come to hold the Eye, and cause it to rest in its place.

I come to see Ra at his setting, and I unite with the breeze at his coming forth: my two hands are pure for adoring him. May I be restored! May I be restored! I fly up to heaven and alight upon the earth; and my eye turns back towards the traces of my footsteps. I am the offspring of Yesterday; the tunnels of the earth have given me birth, and I am revealed at my appointed time. May I be sheltered from the warlike-handed God who comes behind me, may my flesh be sound and my glories protect the limbs of one who waits to take counsel. May the Cycle of the Gods listen to what I say.

To be said on coming forth by day; that one may not be kept back on the path of the Tuat, whether on entering or coming forth; for taking all the forms one desires; and that the soul of the person does not die a second time. If this chapter is known, the person is made triumphant upon earth and in the Netherworld, performing all things done by the living. This chapter was discovered on a plinth of the God of the Hermu Bark by a master builder of the wall in the time of King Septa, the Victorious. This composition is a secret; not to be seen or looked at. Recite the chapter when sanctified and pure; not approaching women, not eating goat's flesh or fish.

**Notes:**
1. This is one of the most important and ancient chapters. The text was already doubtful at the time of the XIth dynasty. It had been handed down in two recensions, both inscribed on the coffin of Queen Mentuhotep. The discovery of one of these is attributed to the time of King Septa of the 1st dynasty, and the second to the time of Menkaura, the king of the third pyramid. These two recensions are also found in the papyrus of Nebseni. The manuscripts present numerous variations, few of which are of significant value. These have been collected in various museums and analyzed in a work by M. Paul Guieysse, who translated and commented on them.The papyrus of Nebseni has been published, and M. Naville has documented all the variations found in the few existing papyri from the best period. I have notes on the readings of the papyri in the British Museum, and also from a cast (now in the British Museum) taken from a serpentine block belonging to the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg. Using these diverse sources, I have tried to present the chapter in as clear a form as possible, based on the texts in the papyrus of Nebseni and the rubric attributing the discovery to the time of King Septa. Some passages remain untranslatable due to text corruption. M. de Rouge read his translation of this chapter before the Acadmie des Sciences years before his untimely death, but it was never published. I also have a version by Mr. Goodwin, with whom I studied this and other chapters nearly thirty years ago. However, this type of literature was not where his remarkable insight shone.

When reading this and almost every other chapter of the Book of the Dead, it's crucial to remember that different divine names do not necessarily imply different personalities. A name represents just one attribute of a person or thing, and one person with several attributes may have several names. This chapter does not imply that the Sun is the Nile or the Inundation, but that the same invisible force manifested in solar phenomena also produces the inundation; He is the Inundator. But he has many other names and titles. In this chapter, as in others, the speaker sometimes identifies with a deity and at other times speaks as a mortal seeking favor.

1. The term "one whose force is concealed or unseen" is a theological term used throughout Egyptian religion, indicating that the deity should not be confused with its external manifestation. The Sun we see hides as much as it reveals the Sun-God, who has other manifestations.

2. Those in the Tuat are called "the Gods of the West" in more recent texts.

3. The divine Hawks on your gables represent the two divisions, North and South, of the kingdom of Horus.

4. The Shrine in the center of the Earth is also mentioned in the 'Book of Hades.'

5. "He is I, and I am He" is a concept found in the Pyramid Texts, indicating a unity between the deity and the individual.

6. Ptah floats over his firmament, as shown in early texts.

7. The adjective "gracious Power" is also written with a hieratic form.

8. Kam-urii, "The great Extender," is a name for Osiris, as the Nile.

9. The yearly inundation is the mature result of the innate force of the God.

10. The term "shoreless" implies an enclosed space with fixed limits, but the inundation has no determinate banks.

11. The usual sacrificial joints, shoulder and haunch, are mentioned.

12. The two Goddesses of the West, Isis and Nephthys, are also deities of the East or Sunrise.

13. The Tenait in Abydos is a feast commemorating the death of Osiris, his mutilation, mummification, and burial.

14. The bolts made fast on the gateways are invoked in the Pyramid Texts on behalf of the deceased.

15. "He who lulls me" refers to the double lion.

16. "I sever the horns" is similar to a passage in Psalm 75:11.

17. The term "lands" varies in the texts and can mean locality, post, or spot of earth.

18. "Blessed are they who see" is written in the Pyramid Texts.

19. The Sycamore of Dawn is repeatedly mentioned in the Book of the Dead and the Pyramid Texts.

20. To hold the Eye, later texts have different verbs synonymous with embracing, holding, enclosing, fastening, staying, or propping.

21. The God of the Hennu Bark resides in the ship referred to in Chapter I. The God of this ship is commonly named Sekaru in the texts, but Hennu is also one of the names of Horus.

22. King Septa of the 1st dynasty, identified with Usaphais of Manetho, is associated with the discovery of this chapter. The second recension describes the discovery at Hermopolis on a slab of alabaster.Prince Hortataf discovered a blue-inscribed slab under Osiris' feet during King Menkard's reign. He took it in the royal chariot after seeing its inscriptions. The text suggests placing a scarab of hard stone, purified with gold, on the deceased's heart, and reciting the 30th chapter's "Heart mine of my mother" incantation. Gold leaf has been found on some scarabs but is mostly missing now. The 'Ritual of Parma' mentions using two metals, gold and silver, for the scarab, which should be placed at the deceased's throat. It was the 30th chapter, not the 64th, that Prince Hortataf discovered.

**Chapter 65: Emerging Victorious by Day**
"Oh, you who shine from the Moon, let me emerge and be revealed in glory. Open the Tuat for me. Let me live and bring my adversaries in bonds before the divine Circle. May my mother's spirit be appeased as I rise with a golden scepter and sever limbs. May I rise as a Babe from between the knees of Sothis."

**Notes:**
- This chapter is similar to Chapter 2 but is not found in older papyri. M. Naville published a version found in five ancient papyri, though they are corrupt and unintelligible in parts. The oldest form is from the papyrus of Nebseni, which is the shortest and shows signs of interpolation. M. Naville used the text of Ca for collation.

**Chapter 66: Emerging by Day**
"I know I was conceived by Sechit and born of Neith. I am Horus, from the Eye of Horus. I am Uat'it, soaring like a Hawk on Ra's brow at the prow of his Bark in Heaven."

**Chapter 67: Opening the Doors of the Tuat**
"Open the doors of Nu's caverns and free the feet of those in glory. Let Shu's caverns open so I may emerge from my funereal pit to my seat at Ra's Bark's prow, without disaster."

**Chapter 68: Emerging by Day**
"Open Heaven's and Earth's doors for me. Let Seb's bolts open and the First Mansion be revealed. Let me pass into the Re-hunit and possess my heart, mouth, limbs, and funereal meals. Let me have air, water, the stream, the river, and the banks. Let me have all things ritually offered in the Netherworld. Let me sit under palm trees in Heliopolis with Hathor, as the solar orb broadens. Let me possess my heart, mouth, limbs, and funereal meals. Let me be raised up and strain for the breeze like a skilled pilot. If this scripture is known, he will travel the earth uninjured forever."

**Notes:**
- Copies of this chapter are found on coffins in Berlin and published by Lepsius. They are in poor condition, so the translation follows Theban papyri.
- The Re-hunit is a passage between the Netherworld and heaven or earth.
- The passage explains the "God of the Broad Face" in Chapter 28. Hathor proceeds to Heliopolis with divine writings.
- The superstition of "whistling for a breeze" among sailors is recognized here.

**Chapter 69: The Flaming One**
"I am a Flaming One, brother to a Flaming One. I am Osiris, brother to Isis. My son Horus avenges me with his mother against my adversaries. Chains bind their arms, hands, and feet for their evil deeds. I am Osiris, eldest of the Gods, heir of Seb. I am Osiris, Lord of life, powerful before and behind. My phallus extends to humanity's limits. I am Sahu, assigning bounds as I sail the starry throng of Heaven, my mother Nut's body. I am Anubis on the day of Rending asunder. I am the Bull in the Field, Osiris, who shut up his parents on the day of great slaughter. My father is Seb, my mother is Nut. I am Horus, eldest of Ra. I am Anubis on the day of Rending asunder. I am Osiris. O great One, who speaks to the guardian of Osiris' door, grant me entry and glory. Let me be appraised and made vigorous to avenge myself. Let me sit at Osiris' cradle, ending my suffering and pain. Let me be strong and renewed with Osiris. Said twice. Let me seize the Thigh under Osiris' place to open the Gods' mouths and sit by him like Thoth the Scribe, with offerings of loaves, beer, beef, and fowl. I offer to Horus, present to Thoth, and sacrifice to the Lord of Heaven."

**Chapter 70: Another Chapter**
"I have come to an end for the Lord of Heaven. I am sound of heart, resting at Osiris' table, King of Tattu, and my heart is stirred by his count."**Chapter 71: Emerging by Day**

"O Divine Hawk, who rises in Heaven, Lord of Mehurit, make me whole as you have made yourself whole. You reveal yourself, disrobe, and present yourself to the Earth. May the Lord of the One Face fulfill his will towards me. I am the Hawk in the Tabernacle, piercing through the Veil. Here is Horus, the Son of Isis. Make me whole as you have made yourself whole. May the Lord of the One Face fulfill his will towards me. I am the Hawk in the Southern Heaven and Thoth in the Northern Heaven, calming the Flame and conveying Law to the God who loves it. Here is Thoth. Make me whole as you have made yourself whole. May the Lord of the One Face fulfill his will towards me. I am Unbu of En-areref, the Flower of the Abode of Occultation. Here is Osiris. Make me whole as you have made yourself whole. May the Lord of the One Face fulfill his will towards me. O you who stand on your two legs, at your own hour, owner of the Two Twin Souls, and who live in Two Twin Souls. Make me whole as you have made yourself whole. May the Lord of the One Face fulfill his will towards me. O you who circle within your Egg, Lord of Mehurit. Make me whole as you have made yourself whole. May the Lord of the One Face fulfill his will towards me. Sebak stands erect, surrounded by his high places, and Neith stands erect in her alluvial grounds, revealing themselves, disrobing, and presenting themselves to the Earth. May the Lord of the One Face fulfill his will towards me. 

Oh, you Seven Divine Masters, who are the arms of the Balance on the Night when the Eye is fixed; you who strike off heads and cleave necks, who seize hearts and drag forth whole hearts, and accomplish the slaughter in the Tank of Flame: you whom I know and whose names I know, know me as I know your names. I advance to you, advance to me: live in me and let me live in you. Convey to me the Symbol of Life and the Sceptre you grasp. Award me the life of yearly speech through countless years, months, days, and nights, so I may come forth and beam upon my own images, with breath for my nostrils, and eyes that see, amid those at the Horizon, on the day when brute Force is brought to reckoning. If this Chapter is known, there is well-being on earth with Ra and a fair abode with Osiris, and the person is glorified in the Netherworld. They are granted sacred cakes and the coming forth into the presence each day, undeviatingly, for times infinite."

**Notes:**
1. The title is taken from the oldest known manuscript, that of Nebseni. The Papyrus Pe, of the same period, has "Chapter for entering after going forth by day, and for making transformations in all forms." The most recent form is in the Turin copy: "Chapter for coming forth by day and repelling brute Force, so that the person may not be seized in the Netherworld, but that their soul may be made sound in the Ta-t'eserit."
2. Lord of Mehurit = Lord of Heaven, the Sun-God. The invocation is repeated: "O you who circle within your Egg, Lord of Mehurit." The God is also said to be the owner of "the Two Twin Souls," Ra and Osiris.
3. The verb is in the second person, not the first, as shown by texts that give the person's name instead of the pronominal suffix.
4. "Thyself" uses the third person pronoun, following a known Egyptian idiom.
5. Lord of the One Face = the Sun, in contrast to the Moon, which has many phases. The God is also called the "Lord of Two Faces" at the beginning of chapter 64, representing the bright and dark aspects.
6. This passage is illustrated by the great inscription of Pianchi, who visited the great Tabernacle of the Sun-God at Heliopolis, lifting the Veil and performing rituals. The Hebrew Holy of Holies was similarly separated by a curtain with Cherubim figures, with an altar for incense offerings.
7. The Seven Divine Masters were the offspring of Mehurit, taking the form of Hawks. They were patrons of arts and sciences, assisting Thoth in composition and earth measurement. They are identified with the seven stars of the Great Bear, with Thoth representing the Polar star.
8. The Symbol of Life and the Sceptre.
9. Brute Force, see chapter 57, note 5.

**Chapter 72: Emerging by Day and Passing through the Ammehit**

"Hail to you, Lords of Rule, devoid of Wrong, living forever, whose secular period is Eternity. I make my way towards you. Let me be glorified through my attributes; let me prevail through my Words of Power, and let me be rated according to my merit. Deliver me from the Crocodile of this Land of Rule. Let me have a mouth to speak, and let my offerings be placed before you; because I know you, and I know your names: and I know the name of that great God to whose nostrils you present delicacies: Tekmu is his name. Whether he makes his way from the Eastern Horizon of Heaven or alights at the Western Horizon of Heaven, let his departure be my departure, and his progress be my progress. Let me not be stopped at the Meskat; let not the Sebau have mastery over me; let me not be repulsed at your gates, let not your doors be closed against me; for I have bread in Pu and beer in Tepu. And let me join in..."I bring my hands together in the sacred place my father Tmu has given me. He has established a home for me above the earth, filled with endless wheat and barley, which my own son offers to me during festivals. Grant me the funeral offerings of beef, fowl, bindings, incense, oil, and all good and pure things that sustain a deity, regularly and eternally, in any form I desire.

Let me descend or ascend to Sechit-aarru and arrive in Sechit-hotep. I am the God in Lion form. If this book is learned on earth or written on the coffin, the person will come forth by day in any form they wish, entering their house without hindrance. They will receive bread, beer, and meat on Osiris's table. They will come forth to Sechit-aarru and be given wheat and barley, flourishing as if they were on earth, doing as they please like the Gods there, forever.

Notes:
1. Ammehit is a name for the sixth abode in Amenta, but here it refers to the Netherworld.
2. Lords of Rule: This term can refer to spirits who have passed trials or Gods who have never been mortal, all possessing a "ka" (spirit).
3. The secular period of the Gods is eternity.
4. The Crocodile may refer to the monster in the Psychostasia (weighing of the heart) scenes.
5. Bread: The Egyptian word "ta" means something pierced or perforated, similar to sacrificial cakes in Leviticus.

Chapter 74: Moving on Earth
Do what you must, O Sekaru, as the God in his house and the God standing on his legs in the Netherworld. I shine above the Leg constellation as I come forth in Heaven, but I lie helpless with a corpse-like face. I faint as I advance, before the teeth of those who raven in the Netherworld.

Note:
1. The Leg constellation is in the northern sky, identified with Cassiopeia. It never sets below the horizon and is associated with purification.

Chapter 75: Coming to Heliopolis
I have come out of the Tuat, from the ends of the Earth, lighting up the Tank. I pass through the noble dwellings of the coffined. I open the dwelling of Remrem and reach the house of Achsesef. I enter the house of Kemkem. The Tet amulet places its hands on me and assigns me to its sister and mother, Kehkehit, who sets me on the Eastern path of Heaven where Ra rises daily. May I arise and be led on, assuming the mummied form as a God, traveling the path of Thoth as he appeases the two Combatants (Sut and Horus).

Notes:
1. Achsesef is a master of those in Amenta.
2. The Tet amulet has its own chapter (156) and is often depicted with hands and feet.
3. The two Combatants are Sut and Horus.

Chapter 76: Assuming Any Form
I have entered the Royal Palace, brought by the Bird-Fly. Hail to you who fly to Heaven, lighting the stars and protecting the White Crown. Make a path for me to follow.

Note:
1. The Bird-Fly is identified with the mantis and is the Tiller of the Rudder of Osiris's ship.

Chapter 77: Becoming the Golden Hawk
I transform into the Golden Hawk, emerging from its Egg. I fly and hover as a Hawk with a four-cubit wingspan, my wings made of green gem. I come forth from the Sektit Bark and rise from the Eastern Hill. I stoop upon the Atit Bark to raise those in their circles who bow to me.I present myself as the magnificent Golden Hawk with the head of a Heron, whose words Ra listens to every day. I sit among the great Gods of Heaven. The fields and their produce are before me; I eat and become radiant, fully satisfied. Nepra has restored my throat, and I possess everything that belongs to me.

Notes:
1. This chapter is the first in a series about "Transformations," which are not like the Greek or Indian concept of Metempsychosis. In Egyptian belief, changing form is a matter of will and glorification, not punishment for sin. The forms taken by the deceased in the Book of the Dead are well-known forms of the Sun-God.
2. The "green gem of the South" likely refers to emeralds, as noted by Pliny and other sources.
3. Nepra is another name for Osiris, associated with the giving of corn.

Chapter 78: Becoming the Sacred Hawk
Oh Horus, come to Tattu, clear my paths, and help me navigate my dwelling places. Look upon me, exalt me, and instill in me Terror and Might, so the Gods of the Tuat fear me and their defenses work in my favor. Protect me from the God who hides his name and those who might harm me in the house of darkness.

Oh Gods who listen to divine words, hush and hear what a God says to another God in a case of Divine Law. Osiris, grant me the transformation you have spoken of, so I may see your attributes and powers. Let me come forth and master my two feet, standing firm like the Inviolate One on high. May the Gods of the Tuat fear me and their defenses work for me. Let me run with your Punners but remain steadfast like the Lord of Life. Unite me with Isis the Mighty, protecting me from harm.

I seek words from Seb and sustenance from the Inviolate One on high, so the Gods of the Tuat fear me and their defenses work for me. I am one of the Bright ones in Glory, with attributes like those who come forth to Tattu. I am invested with the Soul of the one who speaks on my behalf. Instill in me Terror and Might, so the Gods of the Tuat fear me and their defenses work for me.

I am the Bright one in Glory, created by Tmu, originating from the apple of his eye. He has glorified and honored those with him. He is the Unique in Heaven, praised as he emerges from the Horizon, feared by Gods and glorified ones. I am one of the beings created by the eye of the Lord of Oneness. Before Isis gave birth to Horus, I grew and was honored among those in Glory.

I arose as the Sacred Hawk, invested with Horus's Soul to claim his inheritance from Osiris in the Tuat. The God in Lion form, presiding over the House of the Nemmes, told me to return to the confines of Heaven, as I am invested with Horus's attributes. The Nemmes is not for me, but I have free utterance to the confines of Heaven.

I claimed Horus's inheritance from Osiris in the Tuat, and Horus repeated to me what Osiris had said on his Burial Day. The God in Lion form gave me the Nemmes so I could advance to Heaven, seen by those on the Horizon, feared by the Gods of the Tuat, and supported by their defenses.

At the divine words, all at the funereal shrine of the Lord of Oneness bow low. The God in Lion form gave me the Nemmes and wings, granting me strength through his might, so I do not fall upon Shu. I appease my fair brother, the Master of the two Uraei. I know the paths of Heaven, its breezes upon me, and I am not stopped by the raging Bull as I navigate the Field of Eternity, guiding myself through the darkness and suffering of Osiris's deceased ones.

I come daily through the house of the God in Lion form, passing to the house of Isis the Mighty, to see glorious, mysterious, and hidden matters. I am invested with Horus's soul, seeing what is within it, and when I speak at the Doors of Shu, they respond immediately. I oversee the inheritance of Horus from Osiris in the Tuat. I am Horus in Glory, master of his diadem and Light, advancing to the Goal of Heaven. Horus is on his seat and throne. My face and back are that of the Sacred Hawk, equipped as his master.

I come forth to Tattu to see Osiris, bowing before him and Nut. They and the Gods see me, the Eye of Horus and the Flame in the Two Eyes. They reach out to me, and I stand firm against evil. They open the bright paths for me, seeing my attributes and listening to my words. Hail to you, Gods of the Tuat, with repellent faces and aggressive fronts, guiding the Stars and making the bright paths of the Hematit for the Lord of the Soul Most Mighty. Horus has ordained that you lift your faces and look upon me.

I display myself as the Sacred Hawk, invested with Horus's soul to claim his inheritance from Osiris in the Tuat. I bypass the long-haired Gods and those in charge of their dens, reaching those who preside over their caverns and the House of Osiris. I speak to them, making them recognize the God of Mighty Terrors, armed with horns against Sutu. They grant me a gracious pass, recognizing my divine provisions and powers of Tmu.

I make the paths bright in the Horizon and the Hematit in Heaven, firming the defenses for Osiris. I follow the command to come forth to Tattu, see Osiris, and report on the fortunes of his beloved son who pierced Sutu's heart. I recount the divine plans Horus executed in Osiris's absence. O Lord of the Soul Most Mighty, raise me up to see the Tuat. May all paths in Heaven and on earth be open to me, with no repulse.

Osiris, you are exalted on your throne, your hearing is good, your back strong, your head firmly fastened, your heart glad, confident in the strength and courage of those around you. You are established as the Bull of Amenta. Your son Horus sits on your throne, ruling over all life. Endless generations serve and fear him, as do the Gods. Tmu, the Sole Force of the Gods, has decreed it so.

Horus is the offering and the altar, reconstituting and restoring his father. He is the father, mother, brother, and kinsman, proceeding from his father's essence and overcoming his corruption. He rules over Egypt, with the Gods in his service, giving life to endless generations with his Eye.This chapter is rarely found in its complete form, as seen in the Turin Todtenbuch. The shortest version is in the tomb of Horhotep, containing only a few lines but providing the earliest form of the invocation formula. The common reading adds a pronoun suffix to both the verb and its subject, which is ungrammatical. The papyri Ati, Fg, and Ij correctly omit the suffix after the verb in the early part of the chapter. The coffin of Amamu has a chapter with the same title but a different text.

The Sacred Hawk and the Golden Hawk are distinguished only by color, indicating age rather than kind. The typical Egyptian Hawk can be identified with the Falco Lanarius or the Peregrinus. Naturalists say the Lanier of Buffon is the mature male Peregrinus, and the Lanner of Pennant is a young female Peregrine.

The term "baiu" refers to powers. The word "fi" seems connected to motion and corresponds to the Greek "balbis" or the Latin "carceres," the starting and goal posts. The symbol "Q" represents investiture, and a mummified person is called "invested."

The "apple of the eye" literally means point or thorn. The Nemmes is the royal head-dress, mentioned only in this chapter of the Book of the Dead but also in other religious texts. Different manuscripts introduce divine names, but the text is often unsatisfactory. The scribe of Pg ends the chapter with "I am the great God."

The portals of Shu, representing Daylight, respond to the God who comes as Horus. The term "Hetnatit" refers to a place near the Horizon, mentioned only in this chapter. Some divine names are unknown to the copyists and written at random.

Chapter LXXIX: This chapter allows one to assume the form of the Chief God of the Divine Cycle. Tmu, Lord of Heaven, gives motion to all things and creates life. He is self-produced and gives vigor to men. The Gods of the divine circuit and Amenta are addressed, seeking purification, strength, and power. Offerings of perfume, incense, and natron are made to stop the Gods' anger. The speaker claims to know the Gods' names and attributes, appearing as a God in human form, exalted like Ra, and receiving offerings.

Chapter LXXX: This chapter allows one to assume the form of the God who gives Light to the Darkness. The speaker completes the vesture of Nu, lighting up the darkness and uniting with the two brother-Gods. They raise the fallen one and balance Sutu in the mansions above. The speaker equips Thoth with light and seizes the Crown, embodying Maat. They lighten the darkness and overthrow devouring monsters, worshipped by those in darkness.

Chapter LXXXI: This chapter allows one to assume the form of the Lotus. The speaker is the pure Lotus from Ra's nostril, journeying for Horus. The text is difficult, with copyists differing on the interpretation.

Chapter LXXXII: This chapter allows one to assume the form of Ptah, eating bread, drinking beer, and sitting among the great Gods. The speaker flies like a Hawk, alights on the Aat, and execrates dirt. They live on offerings, enjoy bread and beer, and sit under Hathor's date trees. The speaker's head is Ra's, and they are summed up as Tmu, recording Tmu's words and inspiring fear. They are declared the heir of Seb, purified, and given Theophanies. The dwellers in Annu bow to them, and they are more powerful than the Lord of Time.

Chapter LXXXIII: This chapter allows one to assume the form of the Bennu bird. The speaker wheels and turns, flourishing like a flower and hiding like the Hider. They are the Barley corn of every God and the four Yesterdays of the seven Uraeus deities born in Amenta. Horus gives light through his body, opposing Sutu with Thoth in between.Chapter LXXXIV: Transforming into the Heron Hawk

You who hold the bound victims, with knives over their heads and locks and fleeces; you aged and bright ones armed with fate. I ascend to heaven but strike upon the earth, and vice versa. My power brings victory and raises the heavens, and I purify the earth beneath my feet against sinful cities, cutting down those in rebellion. I leave the Gods on their paths but strike the Wakers in their coffins. I do not know Nu, Tatunen, or the Red ones when they oppose me. I do not listen to a Word of Power. I am the Red Calf on the tablets. The Gods say, "Let your faces be unrestrained towards him who comes to me." The morning dawns independently of you; you do not control them. My alternations are in my own hands. I do not say wrong instead of right. Day after day, my eyebrow turns back unswervingly. Evening begins my voyage to celebrate the Reclining and the Embrace of the Aged one who oversees the Earth.

Chapter LXXXV: Transforming into a Soul

This chapter helps one avoid the dungeon. Imperishable is he who knows it. I am a Soul. I am Ra, who comes from Nu, and my soul is divine. I produce food but reject what is wrong. I possess Maat and live by it. I am the Food that does not perish, in my name of the Self-originating Force, along with Nu, in the name of Chepera, from whom I am born daily. I am the Lord of Daylight and reject Death. Let me not enter the dungeons of the Gods of the Tuat. I give glory to Osiris and appease the hearts of those with him, my friends. They fear me and show my might to those in their domains. Behold me, raised upon my pedestal and throne. I am Nu. Wrongdoers will not overthrow me. My orbits are ancient; my soul is divine, the Eternal Force. I create the Darkness at the edges of Heaven. My Soul, advanced in age, creates Darkness at Heaven's edges at my will. I reach the limits and advance on my feet. I lead and traverse the steel firmament, which acts as a curtain. I stop the Darkness and worms; my name is hidden. I drive away aggression from the Lord of the two hands, who is my own Soul. The Uraeus divinities are my body. My image is Eternal, the Lord of years, the King of Everlasting. I am exalted as Lord of the land of Rebu: 'the Youth in Town, the Lad in the Country' is my name; my name is imperishable. I am the Force that creates Heaven and resides in the Netherworld. My nest is unseen; my Egg is unbreakable. I am the Lord on High. I have made my nest at Heaven's edges and descend to Seb's earth to stop evil. I see my father, the Lord of the Gloaming, and breathe.

Chapter LXXXVI: Transforming into the Swallow

I am the Swallow; I am the Swallow. I am the Scorpion-bird, daughter of Ra. O Gods, whose perfume is delightful: Flame from the Horizon: O you in the place where I brought the keeper of his fold - let me have your arm to observe at the Tank of Flame, to advance as an envoy and report. Open it to me so I can tell what I have seen. Horus commands his bark. He has been given his father's throne, and Sutu, Nut's son, is under the grappling hooks he made. I have discovered what is in Sechera. I have touched Osiris's Heart with my hands. I have come to report what I found. Let me enter and report my mission. I purify myself at the great stream where my ills cease, and my wrongs are pardoned, and the spots on my body are erased. O Keeper of the Portal, make the path for me, for I am one of you. Let me come forth by day and walk on my legs. Let me have the feet of the Glorified. I know the mysterious paths and gates of Aarru from where I come. Here I am, to overthrow my adversaries on earth, though my body is buried. If this chapter is known, he will re-enter after coming forth by day.

Chapter LXXXVII: Transforming into Se-ta

I am Se-ta, full of years. I lay down in death and am born daily. I am Se-ta at the earth's edges. I lay down in death, restore myself, and renew myself daily.

Chapter LXXXVIII: Transforming into the Crocodile God (Sebak)

I am the Crocodile God in all his terrors. I am the Crocodile God in human form. I am he who takes with violence. I am the almighty Fish in Kamurit. I am the Lord to whom one bows in Sechem.### Chapter LXXXIX: Reuniting the Soul with the Body

Oh, you who bring and you who run, dwelling in your keep, great God, grant that my soul may return to me from wherever it resides. If there is a delay in reuniting my soul with me, you will find the Eye of Horus standing firm against you, like the vigilant Watchers in Annu, the land of countless reunions. Let my soul and the spirit (Chu) with it be found, no matter where they are. Track my soul across heaven and earth. If there is a delay in showing me my soul and my shade, you will face the Eye of Horus. Oh Gods who guide the Bark of the Eternal One, who lift the sky and enable souls to enter mummified forms, hold firm with your ropes and stop the adversaries so the Bark may rejoice and the God proceed in peace. Grant that my soul may come forth with you from the Eastern horizon of Heaven forever.

### Chapter XC: Restoring Memory

Oh, you who chop off heads and cut throats but restore memory in the mouths of the dead through Words of Power, you do not see me with your eyes or perceive me with your feet. You turn back your face and do not see the executioners of Shu coming to chop off your head and cut your throat. Let my mouth not be closed through the Words of Power I possess, just as you have done for the dead through their Words of Power. Away with the two sentences uttered by Isis when she brought remembrance to the mouth of Osiris and the heart of Sutu, his enemy.

### Chapter XCI: Securing the Soul from Imprisonment

Oh, exalted and worshipped one, almighty, who grants terrors to the Gods and displays grandeur on your throne, make a way for my soul, my spirit (Chu), and my shade. Let me be fully equipped. I am a powerful soul; make a way for me to where Ra and Hathor are. If this chapter is known, one takes the form of a fully equipped spirit in the Netherworld and does not suffer imprisonment at any door in the Afterlife, either coming in or going out.

### Chapter XCII: Opening the Tomb

Oh, you who open and close, who are at rest, open and close for my soul at the bidding of the Eye of Horus, who delivers me and establishes glory upon the brow of Ra. The God of stretched-out steps and rapid paces makes a wide path and vigorous limbs for me. I am Horus, the avenger of his father, who lifts up his father and mother with his staff. Let the path be opened to him who has mastery of his feet, so he may look upon the great God within the Bark of Ra on the day of the Soul's Reckoning. My soul will be at the front during the Reckoning of the Years.

### Chapter XCIII: Avoiding Being Taken to the East

Oh, Phallus of Ra, who flees from the storm, disablement arises from Baba, who uses might beyond the mighty and power beyond the powerful against me. If I am taken to the East, if all evil and injurious things of a feast day of fiends are done to me through the waving of the Two Horns, then the Phallus of Ra and the Head of Osiris will be devoured. If I am led to the fields where the Gods destroy those who answer them, the horns of Chepera will be twisted back, blindness will arise in the eyes of Tmu, and destruction will come through my seizure and being taken to the East.### Chapter XCV: Opening the Place Where Thoth Rests

I am the Fearsome One in the Storm, protecting the Great One from attacks. I strike like the Flint-God and sprinkle like the Sprinkling-God. I guard the Great One from harm and empower the sword in Thoth's hand during the storm.

### Chapter XCVI: Opening the Place Where Thoth Rests

I dwell within my own Eye. I come to deliver Maat to Ra and offer libations to Sutu for Akar and the faithful of Seb.

### Chapter XCVII: At the Bark

Staff of Anubis, may I appease the four Glorified Ones who follow the Master of all things. I am the Master of the fields at their command and the Father of the flood when the canal keeper is thirsty. Look upon me, great and mighty Gods, foremost among the Spirits of Annu. Let me be exalted in your presence. I come to purify my Soul to the highest degree. Do not let any impediment from your mouth ruin me. Let me be purified in the lake of propitiation and balance. Let me plunge into the divine pool beneath the two divine sycamores of Heaven and Earth. Let my Fold be fitted for me as one victorious against all adversaries who deny me justice. I am the Only One, just and true upon the Earth. It is I who say it.

### Chapter XCVIII: Sailing a Ship in the Netherworld

Oh Leg in the Northern Sky, in that conspicuous but inaccessible Stream, I rise and come to light as a God. I am conspicuous but inaccessible. I rise and live, bringing myself to light as a God. I cackle like the Smen-goose but stoop like the Hawk at the nets of the Great Fowler. I sail across the Sky, and Shu stands erect. The Achmiu Stars instantly raise the ladder that lifts the Setting Stars from destruction. I repel mischief as I voyage over the Leg of Ptah. I come from the Lake of Flame, the Lake of Fire, and the Field of Flame. I live and stand erect in the Bark piloted by the God at the head of Aarru. The Achmiu Stars open to me, and my fellow citizens present me with sacred cakes and flesh.

### Chapter XCIX: Sailing a Ship in the Netherworld

Oh you who sail the ship of Nu over the void, let me sail the ship and fasten my tackle in peace. Come, come, Fleet One! Let me see my father Osiris. Oh veiled one, let me enjoy happiness. Oh clouded but manful one, who sails over the chine of Apepi, firm-headed and steadfast when emerging from fiery blows, let me sail the ship and fasten my tackle. This place is empty, where the starry ones fall headlong and cannot rise. The path is narrow like the tongue of Ra. The Patrol who pilots the Double Earth, Seb abides by their rudders. The divine Form reveals the Solar Orb, and He presides over the Red ones. Let me be brought in as a distressed mariner, and let my Soul, my brother, go to that place you know. "Tell me my name," I say. The Mooring post: "Lord of the Double-Earth in the Shrine" is your name. The Blade of the Rudder: "Leg of Apis" is your name. The Hawser: "The Side-Lock which Anubis fastens on to the swathing work" is your name. The Stern or Stem Posts: "The two columns of the Netherworld" is your name. The Hold: "Akar" is your name. The Mast: "Bearer of the Great One while she passes" is your name. The Keel: "Backbone of Apuat" is your name. The Mast-head: "Throat of Emsta" is your name. The Sail: "Nut" is your name. The Leathers: "Made of the hide of Mnevis, which Sutu scorched" is your name. The Oars: "Fingers of the elder" is your name. The Bracement: "Hand of Isis, stanching the blood" is your name.### Chapter XCIX: Sailing a Ship in the Netherworld

Oh, you who sail the ship of Nu over the void, let me sail the ship and secure my gear in peace. Come, come, Swift One! Let me see my father Osiris. Oh veiled one, let me enjoy happiness. Oh clouded but strong one, who sails over the back of Apepi, firm-headed and steadfast when emerging from fiery blows, let me sail the ship and secure my gear. This place is empty, where the starry ones fall headlong and cannot rise. The path is narrow like the tongue of Ra. The Patrol who pilots the Double Earth, Seb abides by their rudders. The divine Form reveals the Solar Orb, and He presides over the Red ones. Let me be brought in as a distressed mariner, and let my Soul, my brother, go to that place you know. "Tell me my name," I say. The Mooring post: "Lord of the Double-Earth in the Shrine" is your name. The Blade of the Rudder: "Leg of Apis" is your name. The Hawser: "The Side-Lock which Anubis fastens on to the swathing work" is your name. The Stern or Stem Posts: "The two columns of the Netherworld" is your name. The Hold: "Akar" is your name. The Mast: "Bearer of the Great One while she passes" is your name. The Keel: "Backbone of Apuat" is your name. The Mast-head: "Throat of Emsta" is your name. The Sail: "Nut" is your name. The Leathers: "Made of the hide of Mnevis, which Sutu scorched" is your name. The Oars: "Fingers of the elder" is your name. The Bracement: "Hand of Isis, stanching the blood" is your name.

### Chapter C: The Book of Strength and Embarkation

This is the book that makes the glorified one strong and allows them to embark on the boat of Ra, along with those who are with the God. Let me guide the divine Heron to the East, Osiris to Tattu. Let me open the caverns of Hapu, clear the path of the Solar Orb, and tow Sekaru on his sledge. Let the Great One give me strength at her fixed hour. I hail and worship the Orb, joining those in adoration. I am one of them. Let me be a second to Isis, and let her glorified ones give me strength. Let me secure my gear, stop the adversary, and force him to turn back. Let Ra lend me his two hands, and let not his divine Boatmen prevent me. Let my strength be that of the divine Eye, and conversely. [As to the sundering of me in the Bark of Ra, let the sundering be as that of the Egg and the Tortoise.]

This should be said over the Figure in the Text, written on clean paper with artist's ink, fresh and mixed with essence of Anta. Let the dead person have it placed on their body without inserting it into their limbs. They will enter the Bark of Ra at the round of each day. Thoth will appreciate them, on their coming forth or entering, undeviatingly for infinite times.

### Chapter CI: Safeguards of the Bark of Ra

Oh, you who are devoid of moisture when coming forth from the stream and who rest upon the deck of your Bark: as you proceed in the direction of Yesterday and rest upon the deck of your Bark, let me join your boatmen. I am a powerful Chu. Oh Ra, in your name of Ra, since you pass through an Eye of seven cubits, whose pupil is of three: make me sound. I am a powerful Chu, let your soundness be my soundness. Oh Ra, in your name of Ra, since you pass through those who are perishing headlong: keep me standing on my feet. I am a powerful Chu, let your soundness be my soundness. Oh Ra, in your name of Ra, since you open the secrets of the Ammehit, which gladden the hearts of the Divine Circle: give me my heart. I am a powerful Chu, let your soundness be my soundness, and the soundness of your limbs be the soundness of my limbs.

This should be written with gum mixed with colors on a strip of royal papyrus and placed at the throat of the deceased on the day of burial. If these phylacteries are placed at their throat, they will rise as one of the Divine Circle and be united with the followers of Horus, while their Lamp is made firm by Isis in heaven beside Sothis. They follow Horus who resides in Sothis. Their Shade becomes divine as well as human. Vegetation grows from their body through the Goddess Menkit. They become a God forever, and their limbs are made vigorous in the Netherworld through Thoth, who did the same for Osiris, causing the light to rise from his dead body, undeviatingly and for infinite times.

### Chapter CII: Entering the Bark of Ra

Oh Great One in your Bark, let me be lifted into your Bark. Let me make head for your staircase. Let me have charge of those who convey you, who are attached to you, who are of the Stars that never set. That which I abominate, I eat not: and that which I abominate is Dirt. Let me not eat of it, but of peace offerings and Art-offerings, by which I shall not be upset. Let me not approach it with my hands, let me not tread upon it with my sandals, because my bread is of the white corn and my beer of the red corn of the Nile. It is the Sektit boat and the Aatit that have brought me to the food.### Chapter CIII: Opening the Abode of Hathor

I am a pure follower. O Ahi, let me become one of Hathor's followers.

### Chapter CIV: Sitting Among the Great Gods

Let me sit among the great Gods and pass through the place of the Sektit boat. The Bird-fly deity will convey me to see the great Gods in the Netherworld, and I will be triumphant in their presence.

### Chapter CV: Appeasing the Ka

Hail to you, my Ka, my coeval. May I come to you, be glorified, made manifest, and ensouled. Let me have strength and soundness. Let me bring you grains of incense to purify myself and your overflow. Do not impute the wrong assertions and resistance I have offered to me. For I am the green gem, fresh at the throat of Ra, given by those at the Horizon. Their freshness is my freshness, and the dainties of my Ka are like theirs. You who lift the hand at the Balance and raise Law to the nose of Ra, do not put my head away from me. For I am the Eye that sees and the Ear that hears. Am I not the Bull of the sacrificial herd? Are not the mortuary gifts upon me and the supernal powers above Nut? Grant that I may pass by you, purify myself, and cause the triumph of Osiris over his adversaries.

### Chapter CVI: Presenting a Largess at Hat-ka-Ptah

Oh God of nourishment, great one who presides over the mansions on high, give me bread and beer. Let me be made pure by the sacrificial joint and white bread. Oh ship of the Garden of Aarru, convey me to the bread of your canal, as my father, the Great one, who advances in the Divine ship.

### Chapter CVII: (Note)

This chapter consists of the first two lines of chapter 109. The vignette over it belongs to chapter 108. It has no separate existence in any of the papyri of the best periods.

### Chapter CVIII: Knowing the Powers of the West

Regarding the Hill of Bachau, upon which heaven rests, it is 300 cubits in length and 200 cubits in breadth. Sebak, the Lord of Bachau, is at the east of the Hill, and his temple is upon it. There is a serpent on the brow of that hill, 500 cubits in length, with three cubits of his forepart pierced with swords. I know the name of this serpent on his hill: "He who dwells in his own flame" is his name. At the close of day, he turns his eyes to Ra; there is a standing still in the Bark and a deep slumber within the ship. He swallows three cubits of the Great Water. Then Sutu is made to flee with a chain of steel upon him and is forced to vomit all he has swallowed. Sutu is put into his prison and says with Words of Power: "Away with you! Steel, which is fastened upon my hand. I remain in your prison, the Bark sails on, and you see the path; but your eyes close, your head is veiled, and I go on and stay your steps. I am the Manful one, who veils your head and cools the hollow of your hand: your strength is my strength. I am the Master of the Words of Power. Who is this who has been delivered to me? This Bright One, who comes on his belly, on his hind parts, and on the joints of his back. Lo! I come, and your might is in my hand. It is I who carry away your might, that I may come and seize upon the Tunnels of Ra who is united to me at sunset as he goes around heaven. But you are pierced with hooks, as was decreed against you of old. I know the powers of the West, they are Tmu, Sebak the Lord of Bachau, and Hathor, Mistress of Sunset."

### Notes

The chapters 108, 109, 112, 113, and 114 are similar in form, matter, style, and composition, each concerned with the divine Powers of some locality. One of these chapters is found on a monument of the Middle Empire, suggesting their ancient origins. The text published by Dr. Golenischef from the Sarcophagus at St. Petersburg shows signs of antiquity. The numerous forms in which this chapter has come down to us indicate its ancient origins.### Chapter CIII: Opening the Abode of Hathor

I am a devoted follower. O Ahi, let me join Hathor's followers.

### Chapter CIV: Sitting Among the Great Gods

Let me sit among the great Gods and pass through the place of the Sektit boat. The Bird-fly deity will guide me to see the great Gods in the Netherworld, and I will be victorious in their presence.

### Chapter CV: Appeasing the Ka

Hail to you, my Ka, my twin. May I come to you, be glorified, made manifest, and ensouled. Let me have strength and health. Let me bring you grains of incense to purify myself and your overflow. Do not hold my wrongdoings against me. For I am the green gem, fresh at the throat of Ra, given by those at the Horizon. Their freshness is my freshness, and the delicacies of my Ka are like theirs. You who balance the scales and uphold the Law before Ra, do not separate my head from me. For I am the Eye that sees and the Ear that hears. Am I not the Bull of the sacrificial herd? Are not the mortuary gifts upon me and the divine powers above Nut? Grant that I may pass by you, purify myself, and ensure the triumph of Osiris over his enemies.

### Chapter CVI: Presenting a Largess at Hat-ka-Ptah

Oh God of nourishment, great one who presides over the mansions on high, give me bread and beer. Let me be purified by the sacrificial joint and white bread. Oh ship of the Garden of Aarru, convey me to the bread of your canal, as my father, the Great one, who advances in the Divine ship.

### Chapter CVII: (Note)

This chapter consists of the first two lines of chapter 109. The vignette over it belongs to chapter 108. It has no separate existence in any of the papyri of the best periods.

### Chapter CVIII: Knowing the Powers of the West

Regarding the Hill of Bachau, upon which heaven rests, it is 300 cubits in length and 200 cubits in breadth. Sebak, the Lord of Bachau, is at the east of the Hill, and his temple is upon it. There is a serpent on the brow of that hill, 500 cubits in length, with three cubits of his forepart pierced with swords. I know the name of this serpent on his hill: "He who dwells in his own flame" is his name. At the close of day, he turns his eyes to Ra; there is a stillness in the Bark and a deep slumber within the ship. He swallows three cubits of the Great Water. Then Sutu is made to flee with a chain of steel upon him and is forced to vomit all he has swallowed. Sutu is put into his prison and says with Words of Power: "Away with you! Steel, which is fastened upon my hand. I remain in your prison, the Bark sails on, and you see the path; but your eyes close, your head is veiled, and I go on and stay your steps. I am the Manful one, who veils your head and cools the hollow of your hand: your strength is my strength. I am the Master of the Words of Power. Who is this who has been delivered to me? This Bright One, who comes on his belly, on his hind parts, and on the joints of his back. Lo! I come, and your might is in my hand. It is I who carry away your might, that I may come and seize upon the Tunnels of Ra who is united to me at sunset as he goes around heaven. But you are pierced with hooks, as was decreed against you of old. I know the powers of the West, they are Tmu, Sebak the Lord of Bachau, and Hathor, Mistress of Sunset."

### Notes

Chapters 108, 109, 112, 113, and 114 are similar in form, matter, style, and composition, each concerned with the divine Powers of some locality. One of these chapters is found on a monument of the Middle Empire, suggesting their ancient origins. The text published by Dr. Golenischef from the Sarcophagus at St. Petersburg shows signs of antiquity. The numerous forms in which this chapter has come down to us indicate its ancient origins.

### Chapter CIX: Knowing the Powers of the East

I know that Eastern Gate of Heaven (the South of it is by the lake of Cha-ru, and the north of it by the stream of Reu), from whence Ra sails with favorable winds. I am the Teller in the divine ship: I am the tireless navigator in the Bark of Ra. I know those two Sycomores of Emerald between which Ra emerges, as he advances over what Shu has lifted up, to every gate through which he proceeds. I know the Garden of Aarru: the wall of it is of steel. The wheat of it is 7 cubits tall, the ears of it are 2 cubits, and the stalk of it is 4 cubits. The barley of it is 7 cubits, the ears are 4 cubits, and the stalk is 3 cubits. It is the glorified ones, each of whom is 9 cubits in height, who reap them, in the presence of the Powers of the East. I know the Powers of the East: Horus of the Solar Mount, the Calf in the presence of the God, and the Star of Dawn. A divine Domain has been constructed for me; I know the name of it; the name of it is the garden of Aarru.

### Notes

Another version of this chapter has been incorporated into chapter 149. The differences lie mainly in the order of the sentences. 

1. Favorable winds: "sailing breezes" correspond to phrases like "favorable winds," "trade winds," "tail wind," "stern wind." There is no authority from the older papyri for the sense of violent or tempestuous winds.

2. Every gate: "Ra at his rising is adored by the Powers of the East. They are the ones who effect the rising of Ra, by opening the door at each of the four portals of the Eastern horizon of heaven."

3. The Calf in the presence of the God: The Calf is seen in the vignettes of this chapter and also of chapter 1. The Morning Star was equally identified with Horus.

4. The divine Domain: "Nouit" designates a rural domain of considerable extent, with or without a village or house. It was a real entity, represented as a person bringing agricultural products and offerings.

### Additional Note

Later copies of the Book of the Dead add a few lines to the chapter, which were not part of the original text. The most interesting portion is as follows: "There are writings in your possession for the grant of fields of corn-land where corn sprouts from the effluxes of the God Ut'eb. The height of the corn is seven cubits, the ears are two cubits; and you shall reap it with the Glorified ones, in the presence of the Powers of the East. You shall enter boldly at the mysterious portals and be purified by those who are there." The God Ut'eb is identified with Osiris, and the text is illustrated by a picture from the temple of Philae. This concept of Osiris is of ancient origin.

### Chapter CXI

This chapter is a repetition of Chapter CVIII.

### Chapter CXII: Knowing the Powers of Pit

Oh you of corpse-like form who are in Chait and Anpit; you Goddess of the Net, who...### Chapter CXII: Knowing the Powers of Pu

Oh you of corpse-like form who are in Chait and Anpit; you Goddess of the Net, who are in Pu; ye who preside over the untilled lands, ye stars and constellations. Know ye why Pu has been given to Horus? I know it if you do not. Ra gave it to him to compensate for the blindness in his eye. Ra said to Horus, "Let me look at what is happening in your eye today," and he looked at it. Ra said to Horus, "Look at that black swine." He looked, and a grievous mishap afflicted his eye. Horus said to Ra, "My eye is as though Sutu had wounded it." And wrath consumed his heart. Ra said to the Gods, "Let him be laid upon his bed, that he may recover." It was Sutu who had taken the form of a black swine and caused the wound in Horus's eye. Ra said to the Gods, "The swine is an abomination to Horus; may he get well." And the swine became an abomination to Horus.

The circle of Gods said, who were with him when Horus came to light in his own children: "Let the sacrificial victims for him be of his oxen, goats, and swine." As for Emsta, Hapi, Tuamautef, and Kebhsenuf, Horus is their father and Isis their mother. Horus said to Ra, "Give me then two brothers in Pu and two brothers in Nechen, of this my own body; and that they may be with me as an everlasting renewal, through which the earth flourishes and storms are quenched." And his name became that of Horus upon his Column. I know the Powers of Pu: they are Horus, Emsta, and Hapi.

### Notes

1. On the situation of Pu, see chapter 18, note 6. The Pyramid Texts (Pepi I, 684) speak of the "those of the Red Crown who are in Pu."
2. Thou of corpse-like form in Chait and Anpit. Chait is the name of the 16th, or Mendesian, Nome of Northern Egypt, and Anpit was its metropolis. The God is Osiris. He is invoked in the "Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys," and asked to come to Tattu, Anpit, and Chait, which are but different names of one Sanctuary.
3. Thou Goddess of the Net. This name corresponds to the Greek Diktynna. The reason why a Goddess representing Heaven should be so called may be understood by the Homeric epithet "polynomos" applied to a net. If, however, the deity was male, according to the other reading, the reference is to "the one who was drowned in the river."
4. Ye who preside, etc. The Egyptian term is identified with the "Inlotinos" of the Demotic and Greek contracts. The remainder of this invocation is so corrupt that the sense cannot be safely guessed at.
5. See Herodotus, II, 47. The pig was not considered impure in the days of the third or fourth dynasty, when Amten, who had risen to the highest dignities, enumerates swine among the domestic animals. But long before the days of Herodotus, a change had taken place in the Egyptian religion as to the nature of Sutu. Plutarch and Aelian are to be read with caution. Some of their information is correct, but it is mixed with much error.
6. The variants are noteworthy.
7. Sacrificial victims. The substitution in Egypt of animal for human sacrifice is entirely without foundation. The supposed evidence of human sacrifices drawn from certain pictures has been misinterpreted.
8. The four children of Horus were also his brothers. He asks for two of them to be with him in each of his two cities, Pu and Nechen. The true sense of the passage is entirely lost in the later recensions and in translations made from them.

### Chapter CXIII: Knowing the Powers of Nechen

I know the Mystery of Nechen: Horus, and what his mother did for him when she herself uttered the cry: "Let Sebak, the Lord of the Marshes, be brought to us." He cast the net for them and found them, and his mother made them fast in their places. Sebak, the Lord of the Marshes, said: "I sought and found the traces of them under my fingers on the strand. I netted them in a powerful net, as the net proved to be." And Ra said: "Verily, those are fishes in the hands of Sebak, and he has found the two arms of Horus for him, which had become fishes." And Ra said: "A mystery, a mystery, in the Net." 

And the hands of Horus were brought to him and displayed before his face on the feast of the fifteenth day of the month when the fishes were produced. Then Ra said: "I grant Nechen to Horus, in the place of his two arms; that his two hands be displayed before his face in Nechen; and I grant to him whatsoever is therein comprised on the feast of the fifteenth day of the month." And Horus said: "Be it granted to me that Tuamautef and Kebhsenuf be taken with me, and that they be guards of my body in dutiful service. Let them be this under the God of Nechen." And Ra said: "Be that granted to thee, there and in Sati, and let that be done for them which is done for those who are in Nechen; yea, they are asking to be with thee." And Horus said: "Be they with thee, so that they be with me to listen to Sutu invoking the Powers of Nechen: 'Be it granted to me that I may make my entry among the Powers of Nechen.'" I know the Powers of Nechen: they are Horus, Tuamautef, and Kebhsenuf.

### Notes

1. Nechen, the chief hieroglyphic variants of which are , was situated in the third nome of Upper Egypt, and was called by the Greeks Hieraconpolis, 'city of the Hawks,' from the hawk-headed divinities mentioned in this chapter as Powers of Nechen, and of which numberless pictures are found on the monuments.
2. Between these words and those which the three old papyri Aa, Ae, and lb, which unfortunately do not agree together on all points, have a few passages here which do not appear in the later papyri. They read, "Horus and what his mother did, tossing in distressful agitation over the water." The mother then addresses persons who are not named, in words of which the sense is not clear; and Ra speaks words of which the only certain ones are "the son of Isis." Then follows the usual text.
3. This legend of Nechen is connected with that of the dismemberment of Horus, of which we have but very scanty information. It must have been like a repetition of what had happened to his father Osiris. The limbs of Horus had been thrown into the water, and when Sebak threw his net, at the prayer of Isis, he brought up two fishes, into which the arms of Horus had been turned. Reminiscences of this story are preserved in the names of several localities. "Two Fish" is the name of the Mer of the second Northern Nome, and of the pehu of the seventeenth Southern Nome; just as "Two Eyes" is the name of the pehu of the eleventh Northern Nome. The latter name may perhaps have reference to Osiris, but the same stories were probably told of both divinities.
4. On dutiful service, a word omitted in the Turin and other texts. Brugsch has discussed the sense of this word and quoted numerous passages in illustration of it. It is of course ridiculous to identify the word with the Hebrew, the meaning of which is radically different.

### Chapter CXIV: Knowing the Powers of Hermopolis

Maat is borne over the Arm, and Neith dawns at Ment'ait, and the Eye is illumined by the one who adjusts its level. I am led in by her, and I know what she brings from Kasu. I tell it not to men; I repeat it not to Gods. I come as a messenger of Ra, to make fast Maat upon the Arm, for the dawning of Neith at Ment'ait, and for restoring the Eye to him who takes the reckoning thereof. I come as omnipotent through the knowledge of the Powers of Hermopolis, who love the Powers which you love.### Chapter CXIII: Understanding the Powers of Nechen

I understand the Mystery of Nechen: Horus, and what his mother did for him when she cried out: "Let Sebak, the Lord of the Marshes, be brought to us." Sebak cast his net and found them, and his mother secured them in their places. Sebak said: "I found their traces under my fingers on the shore. I caught them in a strong net." Ra then said: "Indeed, those are fishes in Sebak's hands, and he has found the two arms of Horus, which had turned into fishes." Ra continued: "A mystery, a mystery, in the Net."

The hands of Horus were brought to him and displayed before his face on the fifteenth day of the month when the fishes were shown. Ra then said: "I grant Nechen to Horus, in place of his two arms; that his two hands be displayed before his face in Nechen; and I grant him everything within it on the fifteenth day of the month." Horus then requested: "Let Tuamautef and Kebhsenuf be with me, to guard my body in dutiful service. Let them serve under the God of Nechen." Ra agreed: "Let it be so, both here and in Sati, and let them be treated as those in Nechen; they wish to be with you." Horus then said: "Let them be with you, so they can be with me to hear Sutu invoking the Powers of Nechen: 'Let me enter among the Powers of Nechen.'" I know the Powers of Nechen: they are Horus, Tuamautef, and Kebhsenuf.

### Notes

1. Nechen, represented by various hieroglyphs, was located in the third nome of Upper Egypt and was known to the Greeks as Hieraconpolis, 'city of the Hawks,' due to the hawk-headed deities mentioned in this chapter.
2. The three old papyri Aa, Ae, and lb, which do not fully agree, have additional passages not found in later texts. They mention "Horus and what his mother did, tossing in distress over the water." The mother then speaks to unnamed individuals, and Ra mentions "the son of Isis."
3. This legend of Nechen is linked to the dismemberment of Horus, similar to what happened to his father Osiris. The limbs of Horus were thrown into the water, and Sebak, at Isis's request, caught two fishes, which were Horus's arms. This story is reflected in the names of several places, such as "Two Fish" and "Two Eyes."
4. The term "dutiful service" is omitted in some texts. Brugsch has discussed its meaning and provided numerous examples. It is incorrect to equate this term with the Hebrew word, which has a different meaning.

### Chapter CXIV: Understanding the Powers of Hermopolis

Maat is carried over the Arm, and Neith dawns at Ment'ait, and the Eye is illuminated by the one who adjusts its level. I am led in by her, and I know what she brings from Kasu. I do not tell it to men; I do not repeat it to Gods. I come as a messenger of Ra, to secure Maat upon the Arm, for the dawning of Neith at Ment'ait, and for restoring the Eye to him who takes its reckoning. I come with power through the knowledge of the Powers of Hermopolis, who love the Powers you love.

### Notes

1. The term "borne" is the same as "to gush, spring forth," but in some cases, it means "to be carried" and is written differently in Ptolemaic inscriptions. The corresponding word in chapter 116 has similar meanings.
2. The "Arm" in chapter 114 is a geographical term, like "arm of the sea." The pictures mentioned have the words "arm of the Urnes" inscribed over the stream where the Sun-God travels at night.
3. Ment'ait is the ancient reading in chapter 114, but later texts have different variations.
4. The texts differ on the reading of "illumined." The older papyri have a specific orthography, though it is somewhat suspicious.
5. Kasu, the 'Burial Place,' was the capital of the 14th Nome of Southern Egypt. Dendera is also called by different names in various texts.

### Chapter CXV: Understanding the Powers of Heliopolis

I have grown from yesterday, a Great one among the Great. I have risen above all things that come into being. The Face is revealed to the Eye of the Only One, and the darkness is broken. I am one of you. I know the Powers of Heliopolis. The All-powerful One extends a hand to us. The Gods say: "The afflicted one is heir of Heliopolis!" I know when the Lock of the Male child was made. Ra spoke with Amhauf, and a blindness came upon him. Ra said to Amhauf: "Take the spear, oh offspring of Men." Amhauf replied: "The spear is taken." Two brothers, Heb-ra and Sotem-anes, whose arm never rests, came into being. One assumed the form of a female with a lock, which became the Lock in Heliopolis. The heir of the temple is active and powerful. The flesh of his flesh is the All-seer, with divine might as the Son begotten by the Father. His will aligns with the Mighty one of Heliopolis. I know the Powers of Heliopolis: Ra, Shu, and Tefnut.

### Notes

The ancient text of this chapter is mostly lost, with only a few words remaining in fragments. The later papyri have altered the text significantly. Scholars like Mr. Goodwin and M. Lefebure have studied this chapter, but the most important work is by M. Naville. The term "All-powerful One" is a divine name, and the "Lock of the Male child" refers to the side lock borne by Horus and other priests in honor of Horus. Amhauf is a proposed emendation, and "offspring" is followed by omitting a preposition. "The flesh of his flesh" may refer to the hereditary succession of the high priest of Heliopolis.

### Chapter CXVI: Understanding the Powers of Hermopolis

Neith dawns in Mat'at, and Maat is carried upon the Arm of the Eater of the Eye by the one who reckons it out. I know it, and I am led in through the Sem priest. I do not tell it to men; I do not repeat it to Gods. I enter as one who knows not and sees not. Hail, Gods of Hermopolis. Know me as I know Neith, so the Eye may be made firm and permanent. I take delight in reckoning what is reckoned. I know the Powers of Hermopolis, who are great at the beginning of the month and diminished on the fifteenth day. They are Thoth the Unseen, Sau, and Tmu. If this chapter is known, filth is avoided, and lye is not drunk.

### Notes

This is the last chapter concerning the Powers of specific places. Despite alterations, their antiquity is undeniable. Mr. Goodwin compared them to medieval Christian legends, which are ancient but not indicative of primitive Christianity.

### Chapter CX: The Beginning of the Chapters of the Garden of Hotepit

This chapter discusses coming forth into Heaven, entering and exiting the Netherworld, and arriving at the Garden of Aarm, at the Rise in Hotepit, and the Grand Domain, blessed with breezes. It describes taking possession, being in glory, plowing, mowing, eating, drinking, and loving. Horus is seized by Sutu, who looks towards the Garden of Hotepit. Sutu releases Horus, and the double path near Heaven is opened by Sutu. Sutu takes his portion of the breeze through his own power and delivers the bowels of Horus from the Gods below. The speaker sails the great Bark on the Stream of the God Hotep, taking it at the mansion of Shu, which is renewed repeatedly. The speaker sails upon its streams to reach its domains, in unison with its changes, rules, papyrus, attendant Gods, and chieftains. The speaker reconciles the two Warrior Gods with those in charge of food and creation, and with each other. The speaker separates mourners from those who quarrel with them, stops those who are violent, and keeps the contentions of the Powers in check. The speaker seeks possession, knowledge, and mastery within the Garden of Hotep, desiring to be glorified, eat, drink, plow, reap, and love there. The speaker's mouth is potent and secured against the Glorified, and they possess a powerful Word of Power. The speaker knows the names of the domains, districts, and streams within the Garden of Hotep, and seeks to be in glory, eat, plant, reap, plow, and love there, united with the God Hotep. The speaker's mouth is armed with sharp points, and they possess the abundance belonging to the Ka and the Glorified. The speaker gives the reckoning of Shu to those who understand it, sails upon its stream, and ranges within the Garden of Hotep, for Ra is in it.### Chapter CX: The Beginning of the Chapters of the Garden of Hotepit

This chapter discusses entering Heaven, navigating the Netherworld, and arriving at the Garden of Aarm, at the Rise in Hotepit, and the Grand Domain, blessed with breezes. It describes taking possession, being in glory, plowing, mowing, eating, drinking, and loving. Horus is seized by Sutu, who looks towards the Garden of Hotepit. Sutu releases Horus, and the double path near Heaven is opened by Sutu. Sutu takes his portion of the breeze through his own power and delivers the bowels of Horus from the Gods below. The speaker sails the great Bark on the Stream of the God Hotep, taking it at the mansion of Shu, which is renewed repeatedly. The speaker sails upon its streams to reach its domains, in unison with its changes, rules, papyrus, attendant Gods, and chieftains. The speaker reconciles the two Warrior Gods with those in charge of food and creation, and with each other. The speaker separates mourners from those who quarrel with them, stops those who are violent, and keeps the contentions of the Powers in check. The speaker seeks possession, knowledge, and mastery within the Garden of Hotep, desiring to be glorified, eat, drink, plow, reap, and love there. The speaker's mouth is potent and secured against the Glorified, and they possess a powerful Word of Power. The speaker knows the names of the domains, districts, and streams within the Garden of Hotep, and seeks to be in glory, eat, plant, reap, plow, and love there, united with the God Hotep. The speaker's mouth is armed with sharp points, and they possess the abundance belonging to the Ka and the Glorified. The speaker gives the reckoning of Shu to those who understand it, sails upon its stream, and ranges within the Garden of Hotep, for Ra is in it.

### Notes

The text of this chapter handed down by the Turin papyrus and those which agree with it contains nothing very difficult for a translator, but on being compared with the older copies it is found to consist of a collection of small fragments of the older text put together without any regard to their original order or context. And about three-quarters of the old chapter are suppressed in the new recension. The editors of the fine papyrus of Sutimes in their notes upon this chapter remark that in the Turin text the sentences are in quite a different order from that of their papyrus, "On peut y voir," they say, "l'effet de lectures et de transcriptions en rebours du sens, par des scribes ayant mal compris les editions en colonnes retrogrades." This is, curiously enough, the very fault of the papyrus of Sutimes itself, which is here wrong from beginning to end, though probably derived from an excellent original. It begins with the "Isle of Corn and Barley," and jumbles together quite incoherent sentences. The oldest copy of the chapter yet discovered is that of the Tomb of Cha-em-hait, at Thebes, and by a strange fatality, it has been published in such a form that in order to read it correctly, we must begin with what is printed as line 11 and finish with line 1. We have it also in a very incomplete condition. We miss the first eighteen lines contained in the papyrus of Nebseni and the last words of every line. The papyrus of Nebseni is the only complete text we have, and here as well as elsewhere it is extremely incorrect. Some parts are so corrupt that a translation must necessarily be dependent upon conjectural emendations which can have no genuine claim upon the reader's confidence. We must be content with waiting till better authorities are discovered. The Gardens of Hotepit and Aanu are the Paradise, Elysian Fields, and Islands of the Blessed of the Egyptian imagination. They were supposed to be situated in the neighborhood of the rising Sun, but certain features were apparently suggested by the islets of the Delta.

The usual meaning of the word Hotepit, when written according to the orthography of the Pyramid Texts, is oblations, offerings. This, however, is only a derived meaning. The word really only expresses a predicate of the things offered, as putting together, uniting, reconciling; Hotep might signify Rest, or Peace; very appropriate names for such a garden. There is also a Goddess here called Hotepit, mentioned in the Pyramid inscription of Pepi I (line 423), as mother of the great Scarab: and the same name is given to Hathor in the temple of Dendera. The name of Hotep (with different determinatives) belongs to one of the islands of this blissful place. The Pyramid Texts furnish some interesting information not contained in the Book of the Dead. We are told that the approach to the Garden is over the Lake of Putrata (see chapter 40, note 1), that there is a great lake (? that of Konsit) in the middle of the Garden of Hotepit, upon which the great Gods alight, and that the Achimiu Sekiu, the starry deities who never set, there feed the departed from the wood of life upon which they themselves live, in order that he too may live. Shu and Tefnut are mentioned as divinities of this place. But perhaps the most remarkable fact is that Horus had enemies even here, who, however, were annihilated by the divine weapons at the disposal of the departed worthy, who was led there in order that "he might sit among the stars in heaven." And here it was that the beatified personage sat upon his throne of steel, which was decorated in front with faces of the lion-God, the feet of it being the hoofs of the great Bull Snta-ura, and extended his hand to the coming generation of men, whilst the Gods approached him in a submissive attitude, and made offerings to him. It was, perhaps, from these offerings that the Garden derived its name. The Garden of Aarru is often mentioned in connection with that of Hotepit, and may perhaps be considered as the most notable part of it. It is through its Gate that the Sun-God rises up into Heaven. It takes its name from a plant, a creeping, climbing, twining plant, such as the convolvulus, hop, or vine.

The term 'Garden' implies in this connection nothing more than a cultivated enclosure. The names of different localities which are invoked by the deceased and appear on the vignette of the chapter, have here been made prominent by means of heavy type.

1. Rise in Hotepit, or (later on) Hotep, is the name of one of the localities. The word has the sense of rising up, coming to light, making an appearance, and like the Greek  is especially applicable to the appearance of daybreak, or the rise of the heavenly bodies.

2. Turning. The group has the apparent sense of building, but the primitive sense is turning, as in the making of pottery.The text seems to show that "building" is not the intended meaning. This might sound confusing, but so does the original text. The papyrus of Ani forces the meaning of "day" upon a sign that would have made more sense as "turn." There were the "Portion of Sutu" and the "Portion of Horus," each representing half the world or half the day. It seems "day" is a misinterpretation, and the true meaning is that Sutu is content with his turn, freeing Horus from the underworld. The confusion of the scribes is evident in the next words. One has "As I \\N. aar," which might be "1 v\\ v\\ Nil aarni to vl di-ii." The first two groups are not phonetically identical but are related and have similar meanings. The last has been identified with the vine-branch, and in conjunction with the text, "The Vine-plant is Osiris." The Greeks identified Osiris with Dionysos. Osiris is sometimes depicted sitting under a vine with grapes hanging.

The term "he who is in Merit" or "he who is in my mouth" and "he who is in the egg" might refer to Anubis. The word "mehit" in Chapter 134 has been translated as "inkstand" or "palette," but it likely means the writing itself. Thoth is the God mentioned here. He reconciles the two Warrior Gods. The word "grind" comes from the notion of "reducing to powder," leading to "wearing away" or "decay." The term "arteries" originally meant wind-pipes, believed to convey air while veins carried blood. This error was corrected by Galen. The Egyptian doctrine of arteries conveying air is first found in the Berlin Medical papyrus.

Hesit, one of the names of Isis or Hathor, is depicted as suckling her son Horus. She is asked for "the white liquor" loved by the glorified ones, identified as milk. The name Hesit is well-attested and should not be confused with hetemit. The term "blooming" or "flowering" is used. The "longed things of Shu" are given to the deceased, who is followed by his kau. Tefait is an abode with delicacies. The phrase "he is in heaven" has been misinterpreted, but the true reading is difficult. The term "salute the stream of Teserit" is rare but correct. Teserit is a Goddess associated with Isis or Hathor. Kankanit is related to the verb of beating but not a place of punishment. Userit is a common name for Isis, especially in later texts. Smait is another appellative. The "Emerald ones" are in the emerald light of dawn. The sun rises through two sycomores of emerald. The term "purification" is related to the word for horn. The vignettes of the chapter are explained in their proper place.

Chapter CXVII discusses taking the blissful path at Restau. The speaker is the Girdled and Mighty one, coming forth triumphantly to secure his suit in Abydos and open the path at Restau. Osiris is asked to make the suit pleasant. The speaker produces the water that balances Osiris's throne and makes his way from the Great Valley. The path is made for the triumphant one. Osiris and the speaker are made triumphant over their adversaries and walk, stand, and speak before the great God, the Lord of Amenta.

Restau is one of the Gates between the Netherworld and Heaven, mentioned in later papyri. The papyrus of Ani depicts the Sun God passing through folding doors.The papyrus of Hunefer shows the God sitting between open doors, symbolizing the Gate of Passages, guarded by Osiris's attendants with "hurtful fingers" to protect against Ra's adversaries. The deceased prays for Ra's protection in Chapter 17. The ritual of being girdled is significant, as seen in various references like Unas 66 and Teta 149. The deceased prays to be girded by the Goddess Tait in Chapter 82. The phrase "coming forth triumphantly" is from the oldest texts, but later texts read "coming forth from the Crown." The "place of Maat" at Abydos refers to the final judgment of the deceased. Osiris's throne rests on water with a lotus flower and the four children of Horus. The deceased is identified with the Nile's inundation, as in Chapter 64.

Chapter CXVIII describes arriving at Restau, where the deceased is glorified by those in mummied forms at Osiris's sanctuary. Guards receive Osiris at Restau. Chapter CXIX describes entering or leaving Restau, where the deceased, as the Mighty one, worships Osiris and acknowledges his power and might. Osiris raises the deceased in power at Restau and Abydos, allowing them to traverse the heavens with Ra.

Chapter CXX is a repetition of Chapter XII, Chapter CXXI repeats Chapter XIII, and Chapter CXXII repeats Chapter LVIII. Chapter CXXIII describes entering the Great House, where Thoth balances the Divine Pair, ends their strife, and rescues the Atu from its backward course. Thoth, the measurer and regulator, establishes equilibrium between Horus and Sutu, representing Day and Night, which only occurs at the Equinoxes. The phrase "rescuing the Atu from its backward course" likely refers to the precession of the equinoxes, a phenomenon noted by ancient astronomers. The term "posterity" in this context means future generations.Chapter CXXIV: Entering the Divine Circle of Osiris

"My soul builds a Hall for me in Tattu, and I flourish in Pu. My fields are plowed by those who belong to me, making my palm tree like Amsu. I avoid abominations and filth. Peace offerings are my food, and I do not touch or tread upon filth. My bread is made from white corn, and my beer from red corn of the Nile. The Sektit or Atit boat brings them to me, and I eat under the Tamarisk's foliage. I know the beauty of the arms that announce Glory for me and the white crown lifted by the divine Uraei. 

O Gate-keeper of the one who pacifies the world, bring me offerings and support me. Let the glorious God open his arms to me, and let the Gods be silent while the Hammemit converse with me. O guide of the Gods' hearts, protect me and grant me power in heaven among the stars. Let every divinity who approaches me be counted among Ra's forerunners, the forerunners of Light and the Bright ones who adorn the sky. Let me have my will with the Bread and Beer among the Gods, enter through the Sun-disk, and come forth through the Divine Pair. Let the Gods who follow speak to me, and let Darkness and Night be terrified before me in Mehit-urit, beside the one in his Sanctuary."

Chapter CXXV: Arriving at the Hall of Righteousness

Upon arriving at the Hall of Righteousness, the deceased seeks to be absolved of all sins and to look upon the divine faces. They say: "Hail to you, mighty God, lord of Righteousness! I have come to you, my Lord, to see your glory. I know you and the names of the Forty-two Gods who appear with you in the Hall of Righteousness, devouring those who harbor mischief and drinking their blood on the Day of the searching examination in the presence of Unneferu.

'Thou of the Pair of Eyes, Lord of Righteousness' is your name. Here I am; I bring you Right and have stopped Wrong. I do not wrong others, slay my kindred, lie, commit treason, or cause mischief. I do not demand more work than is due, nor do I transgress against the God. I am not a tale-bearer, detractor, or doer of what the Gods abhor. I do not harm servants, cause famine, weep, murder, or order murder. I do not cause suffering, reduce temple offerings, or rob the dead of their funereal food. I am not an adulterer and remain undefiled in the Sanctuary of my domain's God. I do not alter grain measures, shorten the palm's length, or cut short the field's measure. I do not tamper with the balance or its tongue, snatch milk from infants, drive cattle from pastures, net birds of the Gods' manors, or catch fish from their ponds. I do not stop water at its appointed time, divide its course, extinguish lamps prematurely, or defraud the Divine Circle of their sacrificial joints. I do not drive away sacred estate cattle or stop a God when he comes forth. I am pure, like the Great Bennu in Sutenhunen, the Nose of the Lord of Air who gives life to all mortals. On the day when the Eye is full in Annu, on the last day of Mechir, in the presence of the Lord of this land, I see the Eye's fullness in Annu. Let no harm come to me in this land, in the Hall of Righteousness, because I know the names of the Gods who appear in it."

Part II: Addressing the Gods

1. "Oh thou of long strides, who appears in Annu; I am not a doer of wrong.
2. Oh thou who holds the fire, who appears in Cher-aba; I am not violent.
3. Oh thou of the Nose, who appears at Chemunnu; I am not evil-minded.
4. Oh Eater of the Shadow, who appears at Elephantine; I am not rapacious.
5. Oh thou Facing-backward God, who appears at Re-Stau; I am not a slayer of men.
6. Oh thou of Lion form, who appears in Heaven; I am not fraudulent in measures of grain.
7. Oh thou whose eyes pierce like swords, who appears in Sechem; I commit no fraud.
8. Oh thou of fiery face, whose motion is backward; I am not a robber of sacred property.
9. Oh Breaker of bones, who appears in Sutenhunen; I am not a teller of lies.
10. Oh thou who orders the flame, who appears in Memphis; I am not a robber of food.
11. Oh thou of the Two Caverns, who appears in Amenta; I am not sluggish.
12. Oh thou of the Bright Teeth, who appears in the Unseen Land; I am not a transgressor.
13. Oh Eater of Blood, who appears in the Unseen Land; I am not rapacious."Chapter CXXV: Arriving at the Hall of Righteousness

Upon arriving at the Hall of Righteousness, the deceased seeks to be absolved of all sins and to look upon the divine faces. They say: "Hail to you, mighty God, lord of Righteousness! I have come to you, my Lord, to see your glory. I know you and the names of the Forty-two Gods who appear with you in the Hall of Righteousness, devouring those who harbor mischief and drinking their blood on the Day of the searching examination in the presence of Unneferu.

'Thou of the Pair of Eyes, Lord of Righteousness' is your name. Here I am; I bring you Right and have stopped Wrong. I do not wrong others, slay my kindred, lie, commit treason, or cause mischief. I do not demand more work than is due, nor do I transgress against the God. I am not a tale-bearer, detractor, or doer of what the Gods abhor. I do not harm servants, cause famine, weep, murder, or order murder. I do not cause suffering, reduce temple offerings, or rob the dead of their funereal food. I am not an adulterer and remain undefiled in the Sanctuary of my domain's God. I do not alter grain measures, shorten the palm's length, or cut short the field's measure. I do not tamper with the balance or its tongue, snatch milk from infants, drive cattle from pastures, net birds of the Gods' manors, or catch fish from their ponds. I do not stop water at its appointed time, divide its course, extinguish lamps prematurely, or defraud the Divine Circle of their sacrificial joints. I do not drive away sacred estate cattle or stop a God when he comes forth. I am pure, like the Great Bennu in Sutenhunen, the Nose of the Lord of Air who gives life to all mortals. On the day when the Eye is full in Annu, on the last day of Mechir, in the presence of the Lord of this land, I see the Eye's fullness in Annu. Let no harm come to me in this land, in the Hall of Righteousness, because I know the names of the Gods who appear in it."

Part II: Addressing the Gods

1. "Oh thou of long strides, who appears in Annu; I am not a doer of wrong.
2. Oh thou who holds the fire, who appears in Cher-aba; I am not violent.
3. Oh thou of the Nose, who appears at Chemunnu; I am not evil-minded.
4. Oh Eater of the Shadow, who appears at Elephantine; I am not rapacious.
5. Oh thou Facing-backward God, who appears at Re-Stau; I am not a slayer of men.
6. Oh thou of Lion form, who appears in Heaven; I am not fraudulent in measures of grain.
7. Oh thou whose eyes pierce like swords, who appears in Sechem; I commit no fraud.
8. Oh thou of fiery face, whose motion is backward; I am not a robber of sacred property.
9. Oh Breaker of bones, who appears in Sutenhunen; I am not a teller of lies.
10. Oh thou who orders the flame, who appears in Memphis; I am not a robber of food.
11. Oh thou of the Two Caverns, who appears in Amenta; I am not sluggish.
12. Oh thou of the Bright Teeth, who appears in the Unseen Land; I am not a transgressor.
13. Oh Eater of Blood, who appears in the Unseen Land; I am not rapacious.
14. Oh Eater of Livers, who appears at Mabit; I deal not fraudulently.
15. Oh Lord of Righteousness, who appears in the place of Righteousness; I am not a land-grabber.
16. Oh thou who turns backwards, who appears in Bubastis; I am not an eavesdropper.
17. Oh Aati, who appears at Annu; I am not one of prating tongue.
18. Oh Tutu, who appears in Ati; I trouble myself only with my own affairs.
19. Oh Uammetu, who appears at the Block; I commit not adultery with another's wife.
20. Oh Maa-antu-f, who appears in Pa-Amsu; I am not unchaste with anyone.
21. Oh thou who art above Princes, who appears in Amu; I do not cause terrors.
22. Oh Chemiu, who appears in Kauu; I am not a transgressor.
23. Oh thou who raises thy voice, who appears in Urit; I am not hot of speech.
24. Oh divine Babe, who appears in Annu; I lend not a deaf ear to the words of Righteousness.
25. Oh high-voiced one, who appears in Unsit; I am not boisterous in behavior.
26. Oh Basit, who appears at the Shetait; I am not the cause of weeping to any.
27. Oh thou whose face is behind thee, who appears at thy cavern; I am not given to unnatural lust.
28. Oh thou, hot of foot, who appears at even; I indulge not in anger.
29. Oh Kenemtu, who appears in Kenemit; I am not given to cursing.
30. Oh thou who carries thine own offering, who appears in Syut; I am not of aggressive hand.
31. Oh thou who has different faces, who appears in Net'efit; I am not one of inconstant mind.
32. Oh Busy one, who appears at Utenit; I do not steal the skins of the sacred animals.
33. Oh thou Horned one, who appears at Sais; I am not noisy in my speech.
34. Oh Nefertmu, who appears in Memphis; I am neither a har nor a doer of mischief.
35. Oh Tem-sepu, who appears in Tattu; I am not one who curses the king.
36. Oh thou who does according to thine own will, who appears in Tebua; I put no check upon the water in its flow.
37. Oh Striker, who appears in Heaven; I am not one of loud voice.
38. Oh thou who makes mortals flourish, who appears at Sais; I curse not a God.
39. Oh thou of beautiful shoulder, who appears at ...; I am not swollen with pride.
40. Oh Neheb-kau, who appears at thy cavern; I have no unjust preferences.
41. Oh thou of raised head, who appears at thy cavern; I have no strong desire except for my own property.
42. Oh thou who lifts an arm, who appears in the Netherworld; I do not that which offends the God of my domain.

Part III: Addressing the Gods in the Tuat

Hail ye Gods, I know you and I know your names; let me not be stricken down by your blows: report not the evil which is in me to the God whom ye follow. Let not reverse of mine come to pass through you. Let not evil things be said against me in presence of the Inviolate One; because I have done the right in Tamerit. I revile not the God: let not reverse of mine come to pass through the King who resides within His own Day. Hail ye Gods who are in the Hall of Righteousness, who have nothing wrong about you; who subsist upon Righteousness in Annu, and who sate themselves with cares, in presence of the God who resides within his own Orb: deliver me from Babai who feeds upon the livers of princes on the Day of the Great Reckoning.

Behold me: I am come to you, void of wrong, without fraud, a harmless one: let me not be declared guilty; let not the issue be against me. I subsist upon Righteousness: I sate myself with uprightness of heart: I have done that which man prescribes and that which pleases the Gods. I have propitiated the God with that which he loves. I have given bread to the hungry, water to the thirsty, clothes to the naked, a boat to the shipwrecked. I have made oblations to the Gods and funeral offerings to the departed: deliver me therefore: protect me therefore: and report not against me in presence of the great God. I am one whose mouth is pure, and whose hands are pure, to whom there is said "Come, come in peace," by those who look upon him. For I have listened to the words which were spoken by the Ass and the Cat in the house of Hept-ro. And I have undergone the inspection of the God Whose face is behind him, who awards my verdict, so that I may behold what the Persea tree covers in Restau. I am one who glorifies the Gods and who knows the things which concern them. I am come and am awaiting that inquisition be made of Righteousness and that the Balance be set upon its stand within the bower of amaranth.

O thou who art exalted upon thy pedestal and who calls thy name, Lord of Air: deliver me from those messengers of thine who inflict disasters and bring about mishaps. No covering have they upon their faces. For I have done the Righteousness of a Lord of Righteousness. I have made myself pure: my front parts are washed, my back parts are pure, and my inwards steeped in the Tank of Righteousness. There is not a limb in me which is void of Righteousness. I purify me in the Southern Tank, and I rest me at the northern lake, in the Garden of Grasshoppers. The Boatmen of Ra purify them there at this hour of the night or day and the hearts of the Gods are appeased when I pass through it by night or by day. Let him come: that is what they say to me. Who, pray, art thou? that is what they say to me. What, pray, is thy name? that is what they say to me. "He who grows under the Grass and who dwells in the Olive tree" is my name. Pass on, then: that is what they say to me. I pass on to a place north of the Olive. What, prithee, didst thou see there? A thigh and a leg. And what, prithee, said they to thee? That I shall see the greetings in the lands there of the Fenchu: What, prithee, did they give to thee? A flame of fire and a pillar of crystal. And what, prithee, didst thou to them? I buried them on the bank of the Lake of Maait as Provision of the Evening. What, prithee, didst thou find there on the bank of the Lake of Maait? A sceptre of flint: 'Giver of Breath' is its name. And what didst thou to the flame of fire and to the pillar of crystal after thou hadst buried them? I cried out after them and drew them forth: and I extinguished the fire, and I broke the pillar, and I made a Tank. Thou mayest now enter through the door of the hall of Righteousness, for thou knowest us. I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the Leaf of the Door, unless thou tell my name: "The Pointer of Truth" is thy name. I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the right side post of the Door, unless thou tell my name. "The Scale-pan of one who lifts up Right" is thy name. I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the left side post of the Door, unless thou tell my name: "The Scale-pan of Wine" is thy name. I allow thee not to pass over me, saith the Threshold of the Door, unless thou tell my name: "Ox of Seb" is thy name. I open not to thee, saith the Lock of the Door, unless thou tell my name: Bone of An-maut-ef is thy name. I open not to thee, saith the Latch, unless thou tell my name: "The Eye of Sebak, Lord of Bachau," is thy name. I open not to thee, and I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the Keeper of the Door, unless thou tell my name: "The Knee of Shu, which he hath lent for the support of Osiris," is thy name. We allow thee not to pass by us, say the Lintels of the Door, unless thou tell our names: "The dragon brood of Renenut" is your name. Thou knowest us: pass therefore by us. I allow thee not to pass over me, saith the Floor of the Hall, for the reason that I am noiseless and clean, and because we know not the names of thy two feet, wherewith thou wouldst walk upon us. Tell me, then, their names. "He who goes before Amsu" is the name of my right foot: and "The Truncheon of Hathor" is the name of my left foot. Thou mayest walk over us: for thou knowest us. I do not announce thee, saith the Doorkeeper, unless thou tell my name: "He who knows the heart and explores the person" is thy name. Then I will announce thee. But who is that God who abides in his own hour? Name him. He who provides for the Two Worlds. Who, pray, is it? It is Thoth. Come hither, saith Thoth, wherefore hast thou come? I am come, and wait to be announced. And what manner of man, prithee, art thou? I have cleansed myself from all the sins and faults of those who abide in their own day; for I am no longer among them. Then I shall announce thee.Who is the one whose roof is fire, whose walls are living serpents, and whose floor is running water? It is Osiris. Proceed, for you are announced.

Your bread and beer come from the Eye, and the funeral meals offered on earth will come to you from the Eye. This is decreed for me. This chapter is recited by a person who is purified, dressed in clean clothes, wearing white sandals, anointed with oils, and presenting offerings of cattle, birds, incense, bread, beer, and vegetables. You should draw a picture on a clean brick of clay from a field where no pigs have trodden. If this chapter is written on it, the person will prosper, their children will prosper, and they will rise in the favor of the king and his court. They will receive the shesit cake, the measure of drink, the persen cake, and the meat offering on the altar table of the great God. They will not be cut off at any gate of the afterlife but will be conveyed along with the Kings of North and South and appear as a follower of Osiris, unwaveringly and for all time.

Chapter CXXV Notes:
This chapter is significant for understanding the religion and ethics of ancient Egypt. The oldest copies date back to the eighteenth dynasty, but the chapter is likely much older. It consists of three parts, with the second part growing out of the first, suggested by the mention of the "Forty-two" Gods and the "negative confession" of certain sins. The second part lists Gods and associated sins, totaling forty-two, which is more than in Part I. The two lists agree to some extent but also differ, indicating they were created by different authors or at different times.

Part III involves an extraordinary examination of the deceased, which is not indicated in Part I. The picture of the Psychostasia (weighing of the heart) is considered part of the chapter, though the texts on it vary and have no canonical authority. The order of trials and the moment the deceased is freed from anxiety about their fate are not consistent across these documents, suggesting they are independent compositions brought together by their subject matter.

Artists of the Ramseside period added another scene where the deceased is judged by a smaller group of Gods, not the forty-two assessors of Osiris. The essential idea is a trial before Osiris, where the person's conduct or conscience is weighed. This trial is mentioned in various chapters of the Book of the Dead and other texts, showing that scribes and artists had creative freedom regarding the details.

The number of forty-two assessors might be linked to the Nomes of Egypt, but this is only certain for later periods and not earlier times. The localities where the Gods appear do not correspond to the Nomes, and some are not earthly locations. For example, Annu is the Eastern Solar Mountain where the Sun rises, not Heliopolis of Egypt. Similarly, Chemunnu is not Hermopolis of Egypt but the place of the Eight Gods who help the Sun rise.

The assessors are not evil spirits but Gods who accompany Osiris and represent his Names, Limbs, and Body. They are strict and just, embodying the concept of Maat (Righteousness), which is about moral conduct and conformity to the Rule of Right. The "Hall of Righteousness" is a dual space where the Sun-God is present, divided into two parts on either side of the God. The two Goddesses Maat, representing Isis and Nephthys, are on the left and right sides of Osiris.

In summary, the chapter emphasizes the importance of moral conduct and righteousness, with the deceased undergoing trials and examinations to prove their worthiness before Osiris and the Gods.The current chapter presents numerous challenges, and while some issues have been addressed, many remain unresolved. Champollion's early work on this chapter sparked significant interest, but the complexities he didn't tackle have only grown with our advancing understanding of the language and its scientific analysis. The text is highly uncertain in key areas, with variations in the list of forty-two sins across different manuscripts, and inconsistencies in the Gods assigned to judge these sins. Notably, the Sutimes papyrus omits certain sins that an Egyptian would typically be expected to account for. Additionally, the same word can appear with different meanings in the same passage across various papyri. Some important words were initially guessed by early translators and have been retained without sufficient justification by their successors. This translation is offered with full awareness of its imperfections and the ongoing challenges in achieving a satisfactory version.

Dr. Pleyte made a significant contribution to our understanding of the first part of the chapter in 1866 with his "Etudes Egyptologiques." Since then, other versions have been produced by Deveria, Lefebure, and Pierret. The Demotic text of the chapter, first published by Brugsch and more recently with a complete translation by M. Revillout, is fascinating but, being from the Roman imperial period, cannot always be relied upon as an authoritative interpretation of the ancient text.

The term "Day of searching examination or reckoning" is derived from the concept of a circle, symbolizing a thorough investigation from all sides. Osiris, often referred to as "He of the Pair of Eyes," is associated with the Goddesses Isis and Nephthys, who are depicted in various forms in the chapter's vignettes. These Goddesses symbolize the Two Eyes, a frequent motif on funerary monuments, representing the light at dawn and sunset, as well as the light cast by the sun throughout its journey.

The symbol of the Two Eyes is deeply significant, appearing on ancient coffins, mummy cases, and funerary tablets, often accompanied by other symbols like the sign of water or the vase, which are also emblems of Osiris. The Two Eyes are sometimes represented within the Winged Disk, and Osiris is frequently depicted with these symbols, highlighting his connection to eternity and renewal.

Isis and Nephthys, as mythological figures, represent not just specific times of day but the entire course of the sun, both in the heavens and the underworld. The expression "he lightens up the earth with his two eyes" is common in texts and emphasizes their role in illuminating the world. When the Two Eyes are distinguished from each other, the symbolism changes, with the Right Eye often associated with Ra and the Left Eye with Osiris.

The chapter also discusses the concept of the Full Moon and its association with Osiris, as well as the idea of the Full Sun, which is linked to the Winter Solstice. This complex symbolism underscores the intricate beliefs and rituals surrounding Osiris and the afterlife in ancient Egyptian religion.In ancient Egyptian texts, the Winter Solstice is often referenced, and in 1470 B.C., the Egyptian year started on July 20, with January 15 marking the 30th Mechir in the Julian calendar. The Eye, symbolizing the Sun, was considered full at the Winter Solstice and likely at the Summer Solstice and both Equinoxes. This is why images of the Four Rudders of Heaven (North, South, East, and West) often feature an Eye on each rudder (see Chapter 148 vignettes). The Two Eyes, representing the Sun and Moon, are attributed to Ra and Osiris, and other Gods associated with them. For instance, the phrase "Thy Right Eye is the Sun and thy left is the Moon" is addressed to Ptah in the Papyrus Berlin, and a similar phrase on the Neapolitan Stele refers to Osiris as the Ram-headed deity Her-s'efit. The Pyramid Texts mention Horus having a Light and a Dark eye, with the "Eye of Horus" usually symbolizing the Sun. This eye is linked to prosperity and abundance, symbolized by offerings like cakes, ale, wine, corn, oil, and honey.

Many Goddesses bear the title "Eye of Ra," all identified with Isis or Nephthys, symbolizing the Sun's light. Shu and Tefnut, brother and sister, play similar roles. In Chapter 17 vignettes, two deities with Eyes over their heads are depicted, possibly representing Thoth, the Sun, and the Moon. The Sun and Moon as Eyes of Osiris, Ra, or Ptah are manifestations of these deities, not to be confused with the deities themselves.

The text also discusses various sins and their divine judges. For example, the crime of killing kindred is highlighted, with historical references to similar acts in various cultures. The term "kindred" doesn't necessarily imply multiple people. The text also addresses the concept of truth, with different translations suggesting either "instead of truth" or "not telling lies in the cemetery." The Pyramid Texts use the phrase "Right instead of Wrong."

Other passages discuss the imposition of labor, the measurement of fields, and the balance beam used in weighing. The balance beam, often depicted in Egyptian art, is described with a tongue and plummet to ensure accuracy. Fraudulent practices involving the balance are mentioned, with the plummet symbolizing a cup full of liquid.

The text also refers to the "manors of the Gods," property acquired by royal grant, and the deceased acquiring land in the afterlife. The term "ponds" is correctly read as a specific type of land feature, with some papyri mistakenly using other determinatives. The God Thoth, identified by his beak, is mentioned, along with the "Eater of the Shadow," possibly referring to gnomons without shadows at noon during the Summer Solstice. The lion-headed God, sluggishness, and other divine attributes are also discussed.In ancient Egyptian texts, the Winter Solstice is often referenced. In 1470 B.C., the Egyptian year started on July 20, with January 15 marking the 30th Mechir in the Julian calendar. The Eye, symbolizing the Sun, was considered full at the Winter Solstice and likely at the Summer Solstice and both Equinoxes. This is why images of the Four Rudders of Heaven (North, South, East, and West) often feature an Eye on each rudder (see Chapter 148 vignettes). The Two Eyes, representing the Sun and Moon, are attributed to Ra and Osiris, and other Gods associated with them. For instance, the phrase "Thy Right Eye is the Sun and thy left is the Moon" is addressed to Ptah in the Papyrus Berlin, and a similar phrase on the Neapolitan Stele refers to Osiris as the Ram-headed deity Her-s'efit. The Pyramid Texts mention Horus having a Light and a Dark eye, with the "Eye of Horus" usually symbolizing the Sun. This eye is linked to prosperity and abundance, symbolized by offerings like cakes, ale, wine, corn, oil, and honey.

Many Goddesses bear the title "Eye of Ra," all identified with Isis or Nephthys, symbolizing the Sun's light. Shu and Tefnut, brother and sister, play similar roles. In Chapter 17 vignettes, two deities with Eyes over their heads are depicted, possibly representing Thoth, the Sun, and the Moon. The Sun and Moon as Eyes of Osiris, Ra, or Ptah are manifestations of these deities, not to be confused with the deities themselves.

The text also discusses various sins and their divine judges. For example, the crime of killing kindred is highlighted, with historical references to similar acts in various cultures. The term "kindred" doesn't necessarily imply multiple people. The text also addresses the concept of truth, with different translations suggesting either "instead of truth" or "not telling lies in the cemetery." The Pyramid Texts use the phrase "Right instead of Wrong."

Other passages discuss the imposition of labor, the measurement of fields, and the balance beam used in weighing. The balance beam, often depicted in Egyptian art, is described with a tongue and plummet to ensure accuracy. Fraudulent practices involving the balance are mentioned, with the plummet symbolizing a cup full of liquid.

The text also refers to the "manors of the Gods," property acquired by royal grant, and the deceased acquiring land in the afterlife. The term "ponds" is correctly read as a specific type of land feature, with some papyri mistakenly using other determinatives. The God Thoth, identified by his beak, is mentioned, along with the "Eater of the Shadow," possibly referring to gnomons without shadows at noon during the Summer Solstice. The lion-headed God, sluggishness, and other divine attributes are also discussed.

15. Thou of the Bright Teeth: This phrase refers to a deity known for their bright teeth, symbolizing clarity or brilliance. The Demotic equivalent is "who openeth his teeth," highlighting their brightness.

16. Aati: This name, often misinterpreted by copyists, is one of Ra's names in the Solar Litany, meaning "Cutter" or "that which cleaves its way." It has been misread by scholars as Teti or Chonti.

17. Tufu: This name has many variants, showing that scribes did not understand its meaning. It appears with different determinatives, including a snake or a bird of evil. The God Tutu, associated with Neith, is symbolized by a serpent or slug.

18. I trouble myself only with my own affairs: This phrase refers to the virtue of minding one's own business, as discussed by Cicero and Plato. It opposes the behavior of busybodies who meddle in others' affairs.

19. A, or Amu: This name refers to a town in northern Egypt, possibly identified with Apis. In rituals, Horus is depicted raising Osiris's body from the water as a crocodile, and Osiris is called "The Crocodile, Lord of Amu."

20. Chemiu: This name means "one who overthrows" and is associated with a deity appearing at the entrance to the Nile. It may refer to violations of ritual precepts.

21. Who raises thy voice words of Righteousness: This attribute is assigned to Isis, known for her clear and powerful speech. She is described as "Mighty in Words of Power" and "Most potent and unfailing of speech."

22. Hot of foot: This phrase refers to a passion that is laudable in Gods but blameworthy in humans. The divine wrath is just, while human anger is imperfect.

23. Kenemta: This God, identified with a cynocephalus, is associated with the constellation occupying the month of Thoth. The name means "in Ape form."

This modernized version aims to make the ancient text more accessible and understandable to contemporary readers.In the Pyramid Texts (Pepi I, 408, and Merira 579), the term is used to mean 'vested,' 'clad,' or simply 'covered.' Brugsch identified the locality Kenemit with the Great Oasis at Khargeh. Its uncertain if the Oasis bore this name when this chapter was composed. The determinative suggests that "Dark" might be a sufficient translation. From the etymology, it could be related to the Greek term for division.

23. Of inconstant mind: Another interpretation of the precept is, "I do not rob the dead of their wrappings," but the text is so corrupt that none of the readings are reliable. The God is called "busy-minded," "planning," "devising," or "wise." The term "Horned one" is equivalent to the Hebrew term for Osiris, especially in the character he was worshipped under at Sutenhunen.

24. Noisy in speech: This is a name of Horus, as noted in Chapter 103.

25. There is no agreed-upon locality in the older papyri, and many omit mentioning a locality. Later texts, like the Turin text, read "Annu."

26. No unjust preferences: This virtue is frequently praised on funerary monuments, where great personages declare they made no distinction between great and small, rich or poor, wise or simple.

27. Of raised head: This is a name of the Nile God, one of Osiris's manifestations.

28. Who lifts an arm: This phrase means to support or hold up, not to bring. The God Shu, who supports the sky, is an example.

29. This introduction to Part III of this chapter occurs only in the Papyrus of Nebkat. Another manuscript has the words "Said upon approaching triumphantly to the Hall of Righteousness." Generally, texts begin with "Hail ye Gods, I know you and I know your names."

30. Reverse of mine: This implies an unfortunate turn of events. An absurd reading suggests the defendant controls the fates of his divine judges.

31. The King who resides within His own Day: This passage is doubtful and does not occur in the oldest text of the chapter. Some papyri have a similar phrase, but the exact meaning is unclear.

32. Cares: The older texts differ greatly, but the most frequent reading is "cares."

33. The Ass and the Cat in the house of Hept-ro: These characters are known from other parts of the Book of the Dead. The Cat is Ra, and the Ass appears as the victim of the devouring Serpent. The Sun-God overcome by darkness is Osiris.

34. Covereth: The right Egyptian word is uncertain, but the meaning is clear. Many pictures show a divinity hidden within or behind a tree.

35. That the Balance may be set upon its stand within the bower of amaranth: This passage mentions divine powers lifting the Balance before them. Amaranth is one of the readings of this text.

36. Disasters: The word means misfortune.

37. Grasshoppers: The word is familiar in Egyptian and serves as a term for comparison, "as plentiful as grasshoppers."

38. The text here is uncertain. Different papyri have varying readings for the hours of the Night and Day.

39. The hearts of the Gods are appeased: This phrase explains the appeasement of the Gods.

40. Let him come: The reading is certain, but the preceding word is unclear. Scribes have written various interpretations.

41. He who groweth under the Grass: This phrase is used in the text.

42. A thigh: This term is used in the text.

43. See the greetings: This phrase is used in the text.

44. The Leaf: This term is used in the text.

45. Pointer (or Plummet) of Truth: This term is used in the text.

46. The Scale Pan: This term is used in the text.

47. The Dragon Brood: This term is used in the text.

48. The Truncheon of Hathor: This word is shown by its determinative to be of wood and is used for striking, blinding, or slaying. Some texts name Hathor, others Nephthys.

49. He who knoweth the heart and exploreth the person: This phrase is used in the text.This passage is similar to the biblical phrase "searching the heart and trying the reins" from Jeremiah 17:10. However, the Coptic Bible closely follows the Septuagint's sense, even using specific Greek words. Thoth is depicted as divine Providence, caring for the universe, a view also found in Edfu texts.

Chapter CXXVI:
"Oh, you four Harbingers who sit at the prow of Ra's Bark, conveying the fixed laws of the Inviolate One, judges of my distress and good fortune, who appease the Gods with flames from your mouths, presenting oblations and sacrificial meals to the Glorified, living through Maat and sated with Maat, who have nothing wrong in you and detest disorder, please end my ills and remove disorder from me as I am smitten to the earth. Grant me entry into Ammehit and Restau, and passage through the mysterious portals of Amenta. May I receive the Shensu and Persen cakes."

Notes:
1. Harbingers or Saluters: These are the Apes who greet the Daybreak, originally four in number, corresponding to the four portals of the Mount of Glory. The number eight (Chemunnu) is easier to explain than six, as stated in the tomb of Rameses VI.
2. Fixed ordinances: This term has various meanings.
3. Distress: This term implies need or constraint rather than captivity. Amenemhat at Benihassan claimed no one was seen in distress or starving under his rule. Horus at Edfu is said to protect the needy against the powerful.
4. Disordered: This term means the absence of strict order, not necessarily wickedness or sin, but physical evil, mischief, pain, or sorrow. Osiris is invoked at Apu as the fiery Bull, rising into full strength and seeing the Golden Horus on the throne of the universe. Joy follows pain, not sin.
5. Through my being smitten to the earth: This phrase indicates a cause or circumstance connected to a preceding statement. It is used to explain the reason behind an action or condition.
6. The older texts end here. The later recensions include the reply of the four Harbingers to the prayer.
7. Mount of Glory: This term is more accurate than the misleading term "horizon."

Chapter CXXVII:
The Book for invoking...Chapter CXXVII:
The Book for invoking the Gods of the Boundaries, which the person recites when approaching them, to enter and see the Strong One in the Great Abode of the Tuat. 

"Hail, Gods of the Boundaries in Amenta. Hail, Doorkeepers of the Tuat, who guard the Strong One and report to Osiris. You protect those who worship you and destroy Ra's enemies. You bring light and dispel darkness. You see and praise your Great One, living as he lives, and invoke him in his Solar disk. Guide me and open the gates of Heaven, Earth, and the Tuat for me. I am the Soul of Osiris and rest in him. Let me pass through the Gateways, and let them cheer when they see me. Let me enter and exit as I please, without any defect or evil attached to me."

Notes:
1. The text followed here is from the Royal Tombs of Rameses IV and VI, called Chapter 127a by M. Naville. The lost Busca papyrus, traced by Lepsius, offers a different text (127b), and the Turin Todtenbuch text has many interpolations. M. Naville noted the close relationship between this chapter and the second part of the "Solar Litany."
2. "Bounds" is not a direct translation of the Egyptian term, which needs explanation from the "Solar Litany." The Sun-God Ra is invoked as a Power overflowing. Each divine form has its own dwelling place, not confined to it. The seventy-five Forms are names of the Solar God or phenomena, each addressed as 'Ra, supreme of power,' with an attribute. In Greek mythology, Apollo had many names expressing his attributes, similar to Egyptian mythology's concept of a God's form. M. de Rouge translated the word as "zone," while M. Naville preferred "sphere." The Egyptian term was a hollow cylinder, like a round tower or deep well, rather than a sphere. "Bounds" is a more expressive translation. The name was given to the mythical Source of the Nile, near Elephantine. The inscription of Seti I at Redesieh compares the abundance of water at the King's cistern to the "cavern of the Double Well of Elephantine." The later orthography writes it differently. The Coptic word for cataracts might be connected to the old Egyptian name, but its history is unclear.
3. The Strong One is Osiris. See Chapter 126, Note 4.

Chapter CXXVIII:
Invocation of Osiris:
"Hail to you, Osiris Unneferu, son of Nut and eldest son of Seb: the Great One from Nut; the king in Taa-urit; the Prince in Amenta; the Lord of Abydos; the Lord of Forces; the most Mighty; the Lord of the Atef crown in Suten-hunen, the Lord of Power in Taa-urit; the Lord of the Mansion: most Powerful in Tattu; Lord of Administration, and of many festivals in Tattu. Horus exalts his father Osiris everywhere, associating Isis the Great with her sister Nephthys. Thoth speaks to Horus with potent utterances, strengthening Horus's heart beyond all Gods. Rise up Horus, son of Isis, and restore your father Osiris! Ha, Osiris! I am here; I am Horus and I restore you to life today, with funereal offerings and all good things for Osiris. Rise up, Osiris: I have defeated your enemies and delivered you from them. I am Horus on this fair day, at the beautiful coming forth of your Powers: who lifts you up with himself on this fair day as your associate God. Ha, Osiris! you have come with your Ka, which unites with you in your name of Ka-hotep. He glorifies you in your name of the Glorified: he invokes you in your name of Hekau: he opens paths for you in your name of Ap-uat. Ha, Osiris! I am here to set your adversaries beneath you everywhere, so you may be triumphant before all the Gods around you. Ha, Osiris! you have received your sceptre, your pedestal, and the flight of stairs beneath you. Regulate the festivals of the Gods, and the oblations to those in their mansions. Grant your greatness to the Gods you made, great God, and appear with them as their Ensign. Take precedence over all the Gods and listen to the Voice of Maat today."

Said over the oblations made to the Strong One on the Festival of Uaka.

Notes:
1. The ancient papyri do not contain this chapter. The translation follows the Turin Todtenbuch text, occasionally corrected by other later period papyri. The chapter is an invocation to Osiris under certain names, similar to many other hymns to the God from the XIIth dynasty to later times. The latter part consists of evocations by Horus to his father, modeled after formulas in the Pyramid Texts, admired and imitated in the Saitic and later periods.
2. Osiris is also called "King in Tau-urit" at Philae. In the second line of this chapter, he is called "in Tau-urit," which, if not identical with Abydos, must have been part of or near that town.
3. "Administration" literally means "things." See note 3 on Chapter 18.
4. "Utterances" are potent words. See note 2 on Chapter 1, and compare Merenra, 103, and Pepi II, 13.
5. "Coming forth" refers to daybreak. The first hour after sunrise was called "the beautiful Coming forth of your Powers," a technical term for daybreak. Remember such proper names as "Ra in Chapter 17," and others.
6. "Thine associate God" or one of those around you. See Note 2 on Chapter 18. M. Chabas noted that Osiris is included among his 'Djadjou,' explained by parallel expressions in Greek, meaning the person with their followers.
7. This passage is an alteration of one of the Pyramid Texts (Teta, 284; Pepi I, 54): "Horus..."Osiris, the Unneferu, son of Nut and eldest son of Seb, the Great One from Nut, the king in Taa-urit, the Prince in Amenta, the Lord of Abydos, the Lord of Forces, the most Mighty, the Lord of the Atef crown in Suten-hunen, the Lord of Power in Taa-urit, the Lord of the Mansion, most Powerful in Tattu, Lord of Administration, and of many festivals in Tattu. Horus exalts his father Osiris everywhere, associating Isis the Great with her sister Nephthys. Thoth speaks to Horus with potent utterances, strengthening Horus's heart beyond all Gods. Rise up Horus, son of Isis, and restore your father Osiris! Ha, Osiris! I am here; I am Horus and I restore you to life today, with funereal offerings and all good things for Osiris. Rise up, Osiris: I have defeated your enemies and delivered you from them. I am Horus on this fair day, at the beautiful coming forth of your Powers: who lifts you up with himself on this fair day as your associate God. Ha, Osiris! you have come with your Ka, which unites with you in your name of Ka-hotep. He glorifies you in your name of the Glorified: he invokes you in your name of Hekau: he opens paths for you in your name of Ap-uat. Ha, Osiris! I am here to set your adversaries beneath you everywhere, so you may be triumphant before all the Gods around you. Ha, Osiris! you have received your sceptre, your pedestal, and the flight of stairs beneath you. Regulate the festivals of the Gods, and the oblations to those in their mansions. Grant your greatness to the Gods you made, great God, and appear with them as their Ensign. Take precedence over all the Gods and listen to the Voice of Maat today.

Said over the oblations made to the Strong One on the Festival of Uaka.

Notes:
1. The ancient papyri do not contain this chapter. The translation follows the Turin Todtenbuch text, occasionally corrected by other later period papyri. The chapter is an invocation to Osiris under certain names, similar to many other hymns to the God from the XIIth dynasty to later times. The latter part consists of evocations by Horus to his father, modeled after formulas in the Pyramid Texts, admired and imitated in the Saitic and later periods.
2. Osiris is also called "King in Tau-urit" at Philae. In the second line of this chapter, he is called "in Tau-urit," which, if not identical with Abydos, must have been part of or near that town.
3. "Administration" literally means "things." See note 3 on Chapter 18.
4. "Utterances" are potent words. See note 2 on Chapter 1, and compare Merenra, 103, and Pepi II, 13.
5. "Coming forth" refers to daybreak. The first hour after sunrise was called "the beautiful Coming forth of your Powers," a technical term for daybreak. Remember such proper names as "Ra in Chapter 17," and others.
6. "Thine associate God" or one of those around you. See Note 2 on Chapter 18. M. Chabas noted that Osiris is included among his 'Djadjou,' explained by parallel expressions in Greek, meaning the person with their followers.
7. This passage is an alteration of one of the Pyramid Texts (Teta, 284; Pepi I, 54): "Horus..."

Chapter CXXIX is a repetition of Chapter C.

Chapter CXXX:
A Book whereby the Soul is made to live forever, on the day of entering into the Bark of Ra, and to pass the Shemzi of the Tuat. Made on the Birthday of Osiris,

(1) Opened be the gates of Heaven; opened be the gates of Earth; opened be the gates of the East; opened be the gates of the West; opened be the gates of the Southern and of the Northern sanctuaries. Opened be the gates and thrown wide the portals as Ra riseth up from the Mount of Glory; opened to him be the doors of the Sektit boat, thrown open to him be the portals of the Maatit, as he scenteth Shu and setteth in motion Tefnut, and those follow who are in the train of the Osiris N, who followeth Ra and taketh possession of his arms of steel.

(2) I am coffined in an ark like Horus, to whom his cradle is brought: and secret is the place, hard by his own shrine, which the God openeth to whom he willeth. And so it cometh that I lift up Right to the Lord of Right, and that I make fast the cord which windeth about the shrine. The Osiris N avoideth the raging storm: the Osiris N is not to be kept away from Ra, not to be repulsed is he. Let not the Osiris N advance into the Valley of Darkness: let not the Osiris N enter into the dungeon of the captives: let him not leap into the grip of Fate, let him not fall among those who imprison souls or come forth among those who would drag him behind the slaughtering block of the Armed God.

(3) Salutations to you, ye sejant Gods. The divine Sword is concealed in the hands of Seb, at daybreak, for he delighteth in drawing to himself both old and young at his own season. And now behold Thoth in the secret of his mysteries. He maketh purifications and endless reckonings; piercing the steel firmament and dissipating the storms around him. And so it cometh that the Osiris N hath reached every station of his. He hath fashioned his staff, and received the oblations of Ra, the swift of speed and beautiful in his rising and almighty through what he hath done. He putteth an end to his pain and suffering, and the Osiris N putteth an end to his own pain; yea, he gladdeneth the countenance of Thoth by the worship of Ra and Osiris. The Osiris N entereth the Mount of Glory of Ra, who hath made his Bark and saileth prosperously, lightening up the face of Thoth, that he may listen to Ra and beat down the obstacles in his way, and put an end to his adversaries. Let not the Osiris N be shipwrecked on the great voyage by him whose face is in his own lap: for the name of Ra is upon the Osiris, and his token of honour is on his mouth, which speaketh to him who listeneth to the words of the Osiris N.

Glory to thee, O Ra, Lord of the Mount of Glory. Hail to thee, who purifiest the generations yet unborn and to whom this great quarter of heaven offereth homage. The steering keepeth clear from misadventure. Lo, here is Osiris who proclaimeth Right, because of the marvel in the West, for he hath put an end to the rage of Apepi, for he is himself the God in Lion form among the associate Gods and protecteth Ra against Apepi daily, that he may not approach him, and he keepeth watch upon him. Osiris seizeth the scrolls and receiveth the offerings. And Thoth supplieth the Osiris N with that which he shall perform for him. It is granted that the Osiris shall carry Maat at the head of the great Bark, and hold up Maat among the associate Gods, and that Osiris gain endless triumphs. The Sheniu marshal the Osiris N, and they procure for the Osiris a voyage amid acclamations. The Satellites of Ra make their round, in the train of the exaltation of Maat, who followeth her Lord. And glory is given to the Inviolate one. The Osiris receiveth the Amsu-staff wherewith he goeth round Heaven. The unborn generations of men give him glory, as to one who standeth without ever resting. Ra exalteth him by this, that he alloweth the Osiris to disperse the cloud and behold his glories. He maketh firm his rudders that the Bark may go round in Heaven and that he may make his appearance in Antu. Thoth is in the centre of his eye, sejant in the great Bark of Chepera. The Osiris becometh one whose words come to pass. He it is who passeth over Heaven unto the West, and the Chabasu Gods of Light rise up to him with acclamation. They receive the cable of Ra from his rowers, and Ra goeth on his round and seeth the Osiris who issueth his decrees; the Osiris N, the Victorious; in peace! in peace! Not to be repelled is he; not to be caught by the fire of thy fate. Let not the tempest of thy mouth come forth against him. Let not the Osiris N advance upon the paths of misfortune: let him avoid disasters, let them not attain him. The Osiris N enters into the Bark of Ra, he succeedeth to thy throne; he receiveth thine insignia. The Osiris N inaugurateth the paths of Ra and prayeth that he may drive off the Lock which cometh out of the flame against thy Bark out of the great Stream. But the Osiris N knoweth it, and it attaineth not thy Bark. For the Osiris N is within it; the Osiris N who maketh the divine offerings.

Said over a Bark of Ra, colored in pure green, and thou shalt place a picture of the deceased at the prow thereof. And make a Sektit boat on the right side of it and an Auit boat.on the left side of it.

Notes:
1. This title is given to the chapter in later versions and is similar to the one in the Berlin papyrus of Nechtu-amen (from the 19th dynasty). Another older papyrus has a different title, "Chapter whereby the Chu is fortified." Instead of the Sheniu of the Tieat, the papyrus of Nechtuamen has the Sheniu of Fire. The Sheniu in this chapter are living beings who attend to Osiris and greet him with acclamations. The term is often translated as 'princes' or 'officers,' but it means those in the circle of a king or God, hence 'ministrants' or 'courtiers,' as in the rubric of Chapter CXXV. The words made on the Birth-day of Osiris are only found in later texts, but the old papyrus has another title and includes the words for the Birth-day of Osiris, which was the first of the five supplementary days added to the year of 360 days. On this day, the chapter was to be recited, and the usual offerings made.

2. Arms of steel.

3. Cradle or Nest, often represented in pictures of later periods.

4. The Armed God, depicted as a hawk armed with bow and arrows, sometimes in the form of Bes, destroyer of the Menti.

5. Sejant Gods, a term used to describe Gods sitting on the ground with their knees raised against their chests, a common posture in Egyptian pictures.

6. This divine Sword, representing unseen fate that brings down the old and young alike to the grave, always ready to receive them. Seb is often referenced in relation to the dead in the Tuat.

7. Whose face is in his own lap.

8. The Amsu staff, an emblem of both Osiris and Horus, often represented with bows, arrows, and other weapons in the oldest coffins.

9. Who issues his decrees.

10. Green, likely meaning pale green or yellowish-green.

11. The rubric ends here, with additional instructions to offer bread, beer, and all good things on the Birth-day of Osiris. If these rites are performed, the soul will rise and live forever, never dying a second time in the divine Netherworld. Later texts add that the text was discovered in the great hall of the palace during the time of King Septa and found in a pit or chamber in the rock. It was made by Horus for his father Osiris Unneferu. Septa is the fifth royal name on the great tablet of Abydos.

Chapter CXXXI: Chapter whereby one proceeds into Heaven by the side of Ra.

1. Oh Ra, who shines this night: if any among your followers presents himself alive as a follower of Thoth, who brings forth Horus this night, the heart of Osiris is glad because he leads them. His adversaries are stopped by the warriors of Osiris N, who follows Ra and has taken his arms of steel. He comes to you, his father Ra, follows Shu, and calls for the Crown. He puts on Hu and is adorned with the Lock on Ra's path, his glory. He arrives at the Aged one, at the Mount of Glory, and the crown awaits him. Osiris N raises it up. Your Soul is with you, strong through the terror and might that belong to you, Oh Osiris N, who utters the decrees spoken by Ra in Heaven. Hail to you, great God in the East of Heaven, who enters the Bark of Ra as the Divine Hawk and executes the decrees. Osiris N enters your Bark and sails peacefully to the Fair West. Tniu says to him: Are you coming in? Mehenit is millions upon millions in length from Amur to Ta-ur, an endless river where the Gods move, whose path is in the fire, and they travel in the fire who come behind him.

Notes:
1. None of the oldest papyri contain this chapter, but this does not argue against its antiquity. The latter part of the text is very corrupt, and we have no means of correcting it.

2. Oh Ra. The name of the God is sometimes omitted in manuscripts, but the context requires its presence. The Sun-God shines in the night through Thoth, the Moon.

3. Warriors.

4. He puts on Hu. This is obscure but aligns with the doctrine of the Pyramid texts. The deceased is fed from night till daybreak and then seizes upon the God Hu. After Sau is fastened to his feet, he enters the bark and seizes the Mount of Glory.

5. Mehenit, a mythological serpent symbolizing the Sun's nightly course from West to East. It is represented as extending over the shrine in which the Sun-God is borne in his Bark. The serpent's many folds symbolize the river or canal's turnings and windings, described as infinite in length.

6. There is a corrupt passage here, which cannot be corrected by manuscript authority. M. Pierret translates it as: "The God who shares the words makes his path of millions of years, a lord without equal, whose path is in the fire."

Chapter CXXXII: Chapter whereby a person is enabled to go round, to visit his dwelling in the Netherworld.

I am the Lion-God who issues from the Bow, and therefore have I shot forth. I am the Eye of Horus, and the Eye of Horus is opened when I reach the strand, coming with a happy outcome. I advance, and there is no defect found in me, and the Balance is relieved of my case.

Notes:
1. The Bow, often written with the determinative of stretching, is the moon's crescent, always turned towards the sun. This observation explains why the sun is spoken of as shining in or from the moon.

2. I follow the Turin text in omitting a word about which earlier texts disagree.

3. See the end of Chapter 1 and note. These words are omitted in the Turin text.

Chapter CXXXIII: Book whereby the Deceased acquires Might in the Netherworld in the presence of the great Cycle of the Gods.

Said on the first day of the Month. Ra makes his appearance at the Mount of Glory, with the Cycle of Gods around him: the Strong one issues from his hidden abode.Chapter CXXXI: How to Ascend to Heaven with Ra

1. Oh Ra, who shines tonight: If any of your followers presents themselves alive as a follower of Thoth, who brings forth Horus tonight, Osiris's heart is glad because he leads them. His enemies are stopped by Osiris N's warriors, who follow Ra and have taken his steel arms. He comes to you, his father Ra, follows Shu, and calls for the Crown. He puts on Hu and is adorned with the Lock on Ra's path, his glory. He arrives at the Aged one, at the Mount of Glory, and the crown awaits him. Osiris N raises it up. Your Soul is with you, strong through the terror and might that belong to you, Oh Osiris N, who utters the decrees spoken by Ra in Heaven. Hail to you, great God in the East of Heaven, who enters the Bark of Ra as the Divine Hawk and executes the decrees. Osiris N enters your Bark and sails peacefully to the Fair West. Tniu says to him: Are you coming in? Mehenit is millions upon millions in length from Amur to Ta-ur, an endless river where the Gods move, whose path is in the fire, and they travel in the fire who come behind him.

Notes:
1. None of the oldest papyri contain this chapter, but this does not argue against its antiquity. The latter part of the text is very corrupt, and we have no means of correcting it.

2. Oh Ra. The name of the God is sometimes omitted in manuscripts, but the context requires its presence. The Sun-God shines in the night through Thoth, the Moon.

3. Warriors.

4. He puts on Hu. This is obscure but aligns with the doctrine of the Pyramid texts. The deceased is fed from night till daybreak and then seizes upon the God Hu. After Sau is fastened to his feet, he enters the bark and seizes the Mount of Glory.

5. Mehenit, a mythological serpent symbolizing the Sun's nightly course from West to East. It is represented as extending over the shrine in which the Sun-God is borne in his Bark. The serpent's many folds symbolize the river or canal's turnings and windings, described as infinite in length.

6. There is a corrupt passage here, which cannot be corrected by manuscript authority. M. Pierret translates it as: "The God who shares the words makes his path of millions of years, a lord without equal, whose path is in the fire."

Chapter CXXXII: How to Visit Your Dwelling in the Netherworld

I am the Lion-God who issues from the Bow, and therefore have I shot forth. I am the Eye of Horus, and the Eye of Horus is opened when I reach the strand, coming with a happy outcome. I advance, and there is no defect found in me, and the Balance is relieved of my case.

Notes:
1. The Bow, often written with the determinative of stretching, is the moon's crescent, always turned towards the sun. This observation explains why the sun is spoken of as shining in or from the moon.

2. I follow the Turin text in omitting a word about which earlier texts disagree.

3. See the end of Chapter 1 and note. These words are omitted in the Turin text.

Chapter CXXXIII: How the Deceased Gains Power in the Netherworld

Said on the first day of the Month. Ra makes his appearance at the Mount of Glory, with the Cycle of Gods around him: the Strong one issues from his hidden abode.

Twinklers fall away from the Mount of Glory at the East of Heaven, at the voice of Nut as she builds up the paths of Ra, before the Ancient one who goes round. Be lifted up, O Ra who is in your shrine; breathe the breezes, inhale the north wind on the day when you discern the Land of Maat. You divide those that follow; the Bark advances and the Ancient ones step onwards at your voice. Reckon your bones, and set your limbs, and turn your face towards the beautiful Amenta. For you are the golden Form, with a couch of the heavenly orbs, with the Twinklers among whom you go round, and are renewed daily. Acclamation comes from the Mount of Glory, and greeting from the lines of measurement. The Gods who are in heaven see Osiris N, they present to him their adorations as to Ra. He is the Great one, who seeks the Crown and reckons up what is needed. He is the One, who comes forth this day from the primeval womb of those who were before Ra, and his coming forth takes place upon earth and in the Netherworld. His coming forth is like Ra daily. Without haste, but unresting, is Osiris N on this Land of Eternity. Twice blessed is he that sees with his eyes and hears with his ears. Right, right is Osiris N: and his future, his future, is in Annu. His oars are lifted as in the service of Nu. Osiris N has not told what he has seen; he has not repeated what he has heard in the house of the God who hides his face. There are hailing and cries of welcome to Osiris N, the divine body of Ra, on traversing the Nu, and while the ka of the God is being propitiated, according to his pleasure. Osiris N is the Hawk, rich in variety of Forms. The Deceased acquires might with Ra, and is enabled to possess power among the Gods, for the Gods are made to regard him as one of themselves, and when the Dead ones see him they fall upon their faces. He is seen in the Netherworld even as the beams of Ra. Said over a Boat of four cubits in length, painted green. And let a starry sky be made, clean and purified with natron and incense. And see you make an image of Ra upon a tablet of light green color at the prow of the Boat. And see you make an image of the Deceased whom you love, that he may be made strong in this boat, and that his voyage be made in the Bark of Ra, and that Ra himself may look upon him. Do not do this for anyone except for yourself, your father, and your son. And let them be exceedingly cautious for themselves. The Deceased acquires might with Ra, and is made to possess power among the Gods, who regard him as one of themselves, and when men or the Dead see him they fall upon their faces. He is seen in the Netherworld as the image of Ra.

Notes:
1. The earliest known text of this chapter is from the Tomb of Amenemhait at Thebes, from the time of Thothmes III. It is almost as inaccurate as that of Nebseni or the Brockelhurst Ax. Nor is the text of Ani of any use towards clearing up any of the difficulties.

2. Acquireth Might. The term does not signify wise, nor has it anything to do with instruction or perfection, as supposed by other translators. As an adjective, it is used to qualify not only animate but inanimate things, such as an egg, beer, and incense. The well-known expressions exactly correspond to the Hebrew terms. The notion implied, as in the Hebrew, is that of strength. In the Prisse Papyrus, it is not a wise man, but a powerful one, a man of rank or influence. This is the meaning of the word in such passages. These expressions are the exact equivalents of the Greek term. The might acquired by the deceased is stated in the final rubric and in all the titles of the chapter in the later recensions to be with reference to Ra.

3. Said on the first day of the Month. These words first appear on the Papyrus of Ani.

4. The Twinklers. The oldest texts in this place have though the equivalent and corresponding word a little further on is which is the usual reading here in the later recensions. The same meaning may be made out of both groups. The stars are manifestly alluded to, as being made to disappear when the Sun makes his appearance. The glance of the eye is characterized by their tremulous motion. The stars are here considered as so many eyes, characterized by their tremulous motion.

5. The true text is here quite lost. Some sense might be restored if we might read instead of the latter word is absolute nonsense in this place, whatever determinative it may have, but the former is the well-known name of a tree held sacred at various places in Egypt. The whole passage then might mean "Enjoy the north wind, and may the Kabasu trees of your abode refresh you."

6. The golden Form. The whole of this passage will become clear after reading the final rubric and examining the Vignettes of the chapter.

7. Line of measurement. The explanation of this will be found in the pictures and text of the Book of Hades. In Bonomi's Sarcophagus, twelve personages are represented in the act of acclamation, and twelve others carry the line intended for the line is stated in the text. "The bearers of the line are those who settle the fields of the Chu. They are called upon to take their line and to fix the arable land of each allotment. Ra expresses his satisfaction at the measurement and tells the Gods and the Chu that their domains are theirs, and that he provides their food.

8. The rubric is taken from Ax.

Chapter CXXXIV: How the Deceased Gains Might

Hail to you who are in the midst of your Ark, Oh rising Sun who rises, and declining one who declines: at whose will millions spring forth, as he turns his face to the unborn generations of men: Chepera in the middle of his Bark, who overthrows Apepi. Here are the children of Seb who overthrow the adversaries of Osiris and destroy them from the Bark of Ra. Horus cuts off their heads in heaven when in the forms of winged fowl, their hinder parts on earth when in the forms of quadrupeds or in the water as fishes. All fiends, male or female, Osiris N destroys them, whether descending from heaven or coming forth upon the earth, or issuing out of the water or traveling along with the Stars. Thoth slaughters them, the Son of the Rock, proceeding from the place of the Two Rocks. Osiris N is dumb and deaf for the Strong one is Ra, the puissant of stroke, the Almighty one, who washes in their blood and wallows in their gore. Osiris N destroys them from the Bark of his father Ra. Osiris N is Horus: his mother Isis brings him forth, and Nephthys nurses him, as they did to Horus, who repels the dark ones of Sutu: who, when they see the Crown fixed upon his brow, fall upon their faces. Osiris Unneferu is triumphant over his adversaries in heaven and on earth, and in the cycle of each God and Goddess. Said over a Hawk in a Boat, with the White Crown upon its head, and the figure of Tnni, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Sutu, Nephthys, painted yellowish green on a fresh papyrus placed in this Boat, together with the figure of the Deceased, anointed with the Heknu oil. Let there be offered to them incense burning and roast fowl. It is the adoration of Ra, and his voyage, for it is granted to him to make his appearance each day with Ra, wherever he journeys; and it is the Slaughter of the adversaries of Ra; positively and undeviatingly for times infinite.

Notes:
1. Declining. This word frequently occurs in contrast with the shining of the sun on his rising, and the former to signify the shining of the sun in his afternoon course.

2. The son of the Rock, proceeding from the place of the Two Rocks. The only explanation I can think of is derived from the identification of Thoth with the Nile. From this point of view, the God is both the son of the Rock and issues from the place of the Double Rock, or of the two Rocks, called in the time of Herodotus Krophi and Mophi.

3. Dumb and deaf. It is strange that this meaning of the passage has so long been misunderstood. The sense of the first word has long been recognized, and 'deaf' is the meaning rightly assigned to in Birch's Dictionary. One instance like the following is sufficient to settle the question: "He is not so deaf that he should not hear your voice." That the subject of these attributes is the Osiris is seen by reference to At, where instead of 'the Osiris' the deceased speaks in the first person, "I am dumb, I am deaf."

4. Sutu. This divine name occurs in the text of Amenemhait in the reign of Thothmes III. And I have noted another instance where the name is written. Dr. Birch called the papyrus Miss Brockelhurst's. It cannot, however, be the Ax of M. Naville, which does not contain the chapter. The disappearance of the God's name from all other documents is a fact.Chapter CXXXV: When the Moon Renews Itself

When the moon renews itself on the first day of the month, Osiris is enveloped in storm and rain. However, the fair Horus provides daily assistance, driving off the storm from Osiris N. Behold him coming: he is Ra on his journey, accompanied by the four Gods who oversee the upper region. Osiris arrives at his destined time and is brought to the light of day by his lines.

If this chapter is known, the deceased becomes a Chu of Might in the Netherworld, never dying a second time and eating by the side of Osiris. If known on earth, he will become like Thoth, worshipped by the living, and will not fall victim to a king's wrath or the fierce heat of Basil, advancing to a blissful old age.

Notes:
1. The phrase "Offerings of the Moment" appears to be an interpolated rubrical direction.
2. A king's wrath is an unstoppable impulse that carries everything before it.

Chapter CXXXVIa: Conveyance in the Bark of Ra

Lo, the Light rises in Cher-aba. He is born, he of the strong cord, his cable at an end, and his rudder taken in hand. I poise the divine machinery to raise the Bark to the cord above, allowing me to come forth into Heaven and be conveyed to Nut. I travel with Ra, like the Kaf, stopping the path at the Uarit of Nut, where Seb and Nut bewail their hearts.

Chapter CXXXVIb: Passage Through the Orbit of Flame

O bright flame behind Ra, dividing his Crown! The Bark of Ra fears the storm. You are bright and exalted. I come daily with Sek-hra from his exalted station to witness the process of Maat and the lion-forms. We rejoice: the great ones are jubilant, and the smaller ones are in bliss. I make my way at the prow of the Bark of Ra, shining like the Glorious ones, holding fast like a Lord of Maat. Here is the Cycle of the Gods and the Kite of Osiris. Grant that his father, the Lord of them, may judge in his favor. I poise the Balance of Maat and raise it to Tefnut for life. I repulse Apepi and heal the wounds he made. Let me pass through the midst of you. I am the Great one among the Gods, coming in the two Barks of the Lord of Sau, the Figure of the great saluter, who made the Flame. Let the fathers and their Apes make way for me to enter the Mount of Glory and pass through where the Great ones are. I see who is in his Bark and pass through the orbit of Flame behind the Lord of the Side-lock, over the serpents. Let me pass: I am the powerful one, the Lord of the powerful. I am the Sahu, the Lord of Maat, the creator of every Dawn. Place me among the followers of Ra, in the Garden of Peace of Ra. I am a God greater than you. Let me be numbered in the presence of the Divine Cycle when offerings are presented to me.

Notes:
1. The two chapters 136A and 136B are combined in later recensions. The ancient texts are obscure, and the more recent versions are equally difficult to understand. A strict literal and grammatical translation is necessary.
2. The word "Light" signifies a heavenly body, like the sun.
3. "He of the strong cord" is the subject of the verb "is born," a compound expression where the adjective precedes the substantive.
4. "His cable" refers to a passage in the Pyramid Texts about a similar voyage.
5. "Machinery" has been replaced by various conjectural emendations in later texts.
6. "The Kaf" refers to divinities in the form of apes, signifying "the hot one."
7. "Sek-hra" is a common reading, sometimes identified with Thoth.
8. "The Maat" refers to phenomena occurring in strict conformity with the laws of nature.
9. "Lion forms" are in a corrupt condition in some texts.
10. "Every Dawn" signifies the creator of every dawn.

Chapter CXXXVIIa: Kindling a Light for a Person

Oh Light! Let the Light be kindled for your Ka, O Osiris Chentamenta. Let the Light be kindled for the Night following the Day: the Eye of Horus rising at your temple, gathering upon your brow, granting you protection, and overthrowing your enemies. Undefiledly and successfully: The light is kindled for Osiris Unnefer with fresh vases and raiment.Chapter CXXXVIIb: Lighting a Lamp for a Person

The Eye of Horus appears, bringing light. The Eye of Horus appears, shining gloriously. Come forth, shining like Ra from the Mount of Glory, and end the opposition of Sutu. The one who raised him up and seized the light for him ends the troubles against you, like the Mount of Glory.

Notes:
1. The two oldest sources for this chapter are the Turin Todtenbuch and a late recension, one of the four tablets in the Museum of Marseilles, published by M. Naville, and the Berlin papyrus of Nechtuamon. The chapter published by M. Naville as 137A in his Todtenbuch is a revised and enlarged edition, not the original text. It concludes with a statement that it was discovered by Prince Hortatef in a secret chest in the temple of Unnut and brought away by royal carriages. These texts are also found in the tomb of Petamenemapt, with various additions, and have been used in the Ritual of Amnion, published by Dr. O. von Lemm. The ceremony of lighting the lamp for the dead is mentioned in the Siut inscriptions of Hapit'efae.
2. "Kindle" conveys the same notion as "strike a light" in the title of 137B. The Amnion Ritual uses "strike a light." Dr. von Lemm suggests a play on words implying both lighting a lamp and striking Sut.
3. "At your temple" in Abydos, Aa, and Petamenemapt.
4. "Rises up" in Marseilles; "opposition" in the Sallier Calendar. The sense is clarified in parallel passages.
5. "Prescription" and "her" refer to the Goddess Apit, depicted in hippopotamus form, lighting the lamp. Over her are the words "Apit, mistress of divine protections."

Chapter CXXXVIII: Entering Abydos

Oh all Gods in Abydos, each with their divine circle, who come to greet me: let me see my father Osiris. Let me be recognized as one who comes forth from his house. I am Horus, the Lord of Kamit, and the heir of Tesherit, which I have seized. I am invincible, with a potent eye against adversaries, avenging my father, and fierce at the drowning of my mother. I smite my adversaries and end their violence.

Notes:
1. "Each one and his" is necessary to bring out the meaning. Every God has a circle of associates.
2. The exact text here is doubtful. The word might mean a relative.
3. "Kamit" is Egypt; "Tesherit" is the land beyond Egypt.
4. "Drowning of his mother" refers to an incident in the career of the Goddess Isis.
5. A word of doubtful meaning follows. It must be connected with the preceding words.
6. "Seized" in the juridical sense of possession.
7. "Writs" is a reading from early papyri, which has disappeared in later ones. The Turin Todtenbuch has "with his two hands."
8. The chapter ends here in Pi and even sooner in later texts. The older papyri differ in the following words, which are corrupt and unintelligible.

Chapter CXXXIX: Identical with Chapter CXXIII

This completes Sir P. Le Page Renouf's translation of the Book of the Dead, as prepared for publication at the time of his death.

Chapter CXL: The Book Read on the Last Day of Mechir

A form rises, shining on the horizon. Atmu rises, pouring out his dew, and the bright one shines in the sky. The abode of the obelisk rejoices because they are complete. There are shouts of joy in the sanctuary, and loud cheering fills the Tuat. They fall before Atmu Harmachis. His Majesty orders the cycle of his followers to give praise to the Eye. My flesh is strengthened, and all my limbs are renewed as soon as the order comes from Ra. His glorious Eye rests on His Majesty in this hour of the night. When the fourth hour is accomplished, the world rejoices on the last day of Mechir, for the Majesty of the Eye is present with the Gods, and His Majesty rises as from the beginning, with the Eye on his head as Ra Atmu.

The eyes of Shu, Seb, Osiris, Suti, Horus, Menthu, Ptah, Raneheh, Thoth, Chati, Nai, Eternity, Necht, Mert, and the land, he who is born by himself. After the computation of the eye is made in the presence of this God, and when it is full and complete, all these Gods rejoice on that day. A festival is made for every God, and they say: Hail to you, praise from Ra, the boatmen tow his boat, Apepi is struck down. Hail to you, praise from Ra who causes the form of Chepera to exist; hail to you, praise from Ra, there is joy in him, his enemies are conquered; hail to you, praise from Ra, who has repelled the chiefs of the sons of rebellion. Acclamation to you and praise to Osiris N. Said on an eye of pure lapis-lazuli or mak stone, ornamented with gold; an offering is made before it of all things good and holy, when Ra puts it on his head on the last day of Mechir; another one is made of jasper, which a man will put on any of his limbs he likes.Chapter CXXXVIIb: Lighting a Lamp for a Person

The Eye of Horus appears, bringing light and shining gloriously. Come forth, shining like Ra from the Mount of Glory, and end the opposition of Sutu. The one who raised him up and seized the light for him ends the troubles against you, like the Mount of Glory.

Notes:
1. The two oldest sources for this chapter are the Turin Todtenbuch and a late recension, one of the four tablets in the Museum of Marseilles, published by M. Naville, and the Berlin papyrus of Nechtuamon. The chapter published by M. Naville as 137A in his Todtenbuch is a revised and enlarged edition, not the original text. It concludes with a statement that it was discovered by Prince Hortatef in a secret chest in the temple of Unnut and brought away by royal carriages. These texts are also found in the tomb of Petamenemapt, with various additions, and have been used in the Ritual of Amnion, published by Dr. O. von Lemm. The ceremony of lighting the lamp for the dead is mentioned in the Siut inscriptions of Hapit'efae.
2. "Kindle" conveys the same notion as "strike a light" in the title of 137B. The Amnion Ritual uses "strike a light." Dr. von Lemm suggests a play on words implying both lighting a lamp and striking Sut.
3. "At your temple" in Abydos, Aa, and Petamenemapt.
4. "Rises up" in Marseilles; "opposition" in the Sallier Calendar. The sense is clarified in parallel passages.
5. "Prescription" and "her" refer to the Goddess Apit, depicted in hippopotamus form, lighting the lamp. Over her are the words "Apit, mistress of divine protections."

Chapter CXXXVIII: Entering Abydos

Oh all Gods in Abydos, each with their divine circle, who come to greet me: let me see my father Osiris. Let me be recognized as one who comes forth from his house. I am Horus, the Lord of Kamit, and the heir of Tesherit, which I have seized. I am invincible, with a potent eye against adversaries, avenging my father, and fierce at the drowning of my mother. I smite my adversaries and end their violence.

Notes:
1. "Each one and his" is necessary to bring out the meaning. Every God has a circle of associates.
2. The exact text here is doubtful. The word might mean a relative.
3. "Kamit" is Egypt; "Tesherit" is the land beyond Egypt.
4. "Drowning of his mother" refers to an incident in the career of the Goddess Isis.
5. A word of doubtful meaning follows. It must be connected with the preceding words.
6. "Seized" in the juridical sense of possession.
7. "Writs" is a reading from early papyri, which has disappeared in later ones. The Turin Todtenbuch has "with his two hands."
8. The chapter ends here in Pi and even sooner in later texts. The older papyri differ in the following words, which are corrupt and unintelligible.

Chapter CXXXIX: Identical with Chapter CXXIII

This completes Sir P. Le Page Renouf's translation of the Book of the Dead, as prepared for publication at the time of his death.

Chapter CXL: The Book Read on the Last Day of Mechir

A form rises, shining on the horizon. Atmu rises, pouring out his dew, and the bright one shines in the sky. The abode of the obelisk rejoices because they are complete. There are shouts of joy in the sanctuary, and loud cheering fills the Tuat. They fall before Atmu Harmachis. His Majesty orders the cycle of his followers to give praise to the Eye. My flesh is strengthened, and all my limbs are renewed as soon as the order comes from Ra. His glorious Eye rests on His Majesty in this hour of the night. When the fourth hour is accomplished, the world rejoices on the last day of Mechir, for the Majesty of the Eye is present with the Gods, and His Majesty rises as from the beginning, with the Eye on his head as Ra Atmu.

The eyes of Shu, Seb, Osiris, Suti, Horus, Menthu, Ptah, Raneheh, Thoth, Chati, Nai, Eternity, Necht, Mert, and the land, he who is born by himself. After the computation of the eye is made in the presence of this God, and when it is full and complete, all these Gods rejoice on that day. A festival is made for every God, and they say: Hail to you, praise from Ra, the boatmen tow his boat, Apepi is struck down. Hail to you, praise from Ra who causes the form of Chepera to exist; hail to you, praise from Ra, there is joy in him, his enemies are conquered; hail to you, praise from Ra, who has repelled the chiefs of the sons of rebellion. Acclamation to you and praise to Osiris N. Said on an eye of pure lapis-lazuli or mak stone, ornamented with gold; an offering is made before it of all things good and holy, when Ra puts it on his head on the last day of Mechir; another one is made of jasper, which a man will put on any of his limbs he likes.

Chapter CXLI: The Book of the Arrival

The first gate. He whose face is overturned, who has many attributes, is the name of the occupant of the first gate. The adjuster, is the name of the warden thereof, and he with the loud voice the name of the herald.

The second gate. He who raises his face, is the name of the occupant of the second gate; he with the revolving face is the name of the warden thereof; the consuming one is the name of the herald.

The third gate. He who eats his own filth, is the name of the occupant. The watchful, is the name of the warden thereof; the consuming one is the name of the herald.The fourth gate is guarded by "He who opposes garrulity," with "The attentive one" as the warden and "The great one who drives back the crocodile" as the herald. The fifth gate's occupant is "He who lives on worms," with "The consuming flame" as the warden and "The horn which strikes the furious" as the herald. The sixth gate is occupied by "He who makes the loaves, with a thundering voice," with "He who shows his face" as the warden and "The stone knife which belongs to the sky" as the herald. The seventh gate's occupant is "He who takes possession of their knives," with "The high voice" as the warden and "He who drives back the enemies" as the herald.

These gates lead to Osiris, and those who guard them and herald the world's events to Osiris daily are known to Osiris N. He is born in Restau, where he receives the investiture in Pu, akin to Osiris's purification. N. leads the Gods on the horizon with the protectors of Osiris and is celebrated as a glorious one who performs the rites. N. celebrates the festival of the first day of the month and is the herald on the fifteenth day. N. carries the sacred flame to Thoth's hand at night and navigates in Ra's boat. N.'s attributes are those of Ra's boat, and he is greater and mightier than those on the roads of Maat. N. despises corruption and embodies Horus's attributes, the firstborn of Ra, fulfilling his will. N. is not fettered or driven away from Osiris's gates and is perfect, following Osiris Khent Amenta daily. His domains are in Sechet hotepu among those who know and perform sacred rites to Osiris. N. is on Thoth's side, bringing offerings, and Anubis ensures that N. receives his offerings without them being taken by captives. N. comes like Horus, adorning the horizon of heaven, and directs Ra's march towards the horizon's gates, bringing joy to the Gods.

The divine scent is upon Osiris, and the God with the lock will not reach him; the gatekeepers will not be hostile to him. N. is hidden inside the palace, in the sanctuary of the God, the lord of Tuat. N. reaches it after Hathor, gathers his hosts, brings Maat to Ra, and drives away the Mighty One, Apepi. N. pierces the steel firmament and repels the raging storm, giving life to Ra's seamen. N. carries offerings to the boat, ensuring a successful voyage. N. marches, and when he reaches it, his face is like the Great One, and his back like the lofty one. N. is the lord of the mighty, well-pleased on the horizon, valiant, striking down enemies, and making his way to Osiris.

This text is written in yellow ink on the sacred circle of Gods in Ra's boat, where offerings are made to revive the deceased and make him powerful among the Gods, ensuring he is not repulsed or driven back from the Tuat's pylons. Reading this text to the deceased's statue grants access to every hall in the books. Offerings include the haunch, head, heart, and hoof of a red bull, four vases of blood, scent vases, sixteen pointed white loaves, eight round loaves, eight chenfu loaves, eight hebennu loaves, eight casks of beer, eight vases of dry corn, four tanks of milk from a white cow, fresh herbs, olive oil, green eye paint, antimony, odoriferous oils, and burning incense. This is said while putting on a clay seal twice. Reading this book without being seen widens the deceased's steps in heaven, earth, and the Tuat, exalting him more than any ceremony.

Notes:
1. The title is from Papyrus Ax. The Turin text calls this chapter "the chapter of knowing the occupants of the seven gates."
2. A flame, as indicated by the determinative, is mentioned in chapter 147.
3. "Receives the saying" likely means receiving the right to say the following words: "I am one of them."
4. The word has various meanings, often corresponding to "nature" or used as a periphrase for an abstract adjective.
5. The God of the lock, another name for Apepi, an evil power to be driven away.
6. The steel firmament, often associated with storms and bad weather, possibly referring to the dark sky.
7. The books of Thoth, the divine writer.
8. The name of the book or page containing the offerings catalog.
9. Vignettes of chapter 144 depict the gates, warder, and herald; the occupant is not shown, unlike in chapter 147.
10. No definite order or rule in these figures, similar to the names, which vary in attribution.

Chapters CXLV and CXLVI: Knowing the pylons of Osiris's house in the Garden of Aarrti. The first pylon is named "The lady of trembling whose walls are high, the lady of destruction, who directs the words driving away the storm, forcing back the violent." The doorkeeper is "The brave." The second pylon is named...The second pylon is guarded by "The lady of heaven, mistress of the world, the consuming one, the lady of mankind, who counts the human beings." The doorkeeper's name is Meshept. 

The third pylon is "The lady of altars, rich in offerings, with whom all the Gods gather on the day they sail to Abydos." The doorkeeper's name is The Anointer.

The fourth pylon is "She who holds the knives, the mistress of the world, who destroys the enemies of the God whose heart is motionless, who gives advice, and is free from impurity." The doorkeeper's name is The Bull.

The fifth pylon is "The flame, the lady of the words of power, who gives joy to those who address their supplications to her, and whom no one on earth will come near." The doorkeeper's name is He Who Coerces the Rebels.

The sixth pylon is "The lady of light, who roars loud; whose length and breadth are unknown, and the like of whom never was found from the beginning. There are serpents on her, the number of which is unknown; they were born before the God whose heart is motionless." The doorkeeper's name is The Consort.

The seventh pylon is "The shroud which enwraps the dead; the monster who seeks to hide the body." The doorkeeper's name is Akesti.

The eighth pylon is "The burning flame whose fire is never quenched; she who is provided with burning heat, who sends forth her hand, and slaughters without mercy. Nobody goes near her for fear of being hurt." The doorkeeper's name is He Who Protects His Body.

The ninth pylon is "The foremost, the Mighty One, the joyous who gives birth to her lord; whose circumference is 350 measures; she who shines like southern emerald, who raises Besu, and encourages the dead, she who provides her lord with offerings every day."

The tenth pylon is "She with a loud voice; who shouts curses to those who make supplications to her; the very brave, the dreadful, who does not destroy what is within her." The doorkeeper's name is He Who Embraces the Great God.

The eleventh pylon is "She who renews her knives, who consumes her enemies, the mistress of all pylons, to whom acclamations are given in the daytime and in the twilight. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The twelfth pylon is "She who addresses her world and destroys those who come through the morning heat, the lady of brightness, who listens to the words of her lord every day. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The thirteenth pylon is "Isis extends her two hands upon her; she lightens the Nile in its hidden abode. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The fourteenth pylon is "The lady of fear, who dances on the impure, to whom the Haker festival is celebrated on the day of the hearing of yells. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The fifteenth pylon is "The evil one, with red hair and eyes, who comes out at night, who binds her enemy all around, who puts her hands over the God whose heart is motionless, in his hour of danger, who goes and comes. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The sixteenth pylon is "The terrible, the lady of the morning dew, who throws out her burning heat, and sprinkles her sparks of fire over her enemies when she appears. She who creates the mysteries of the earth. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The seventeenth pylon is "She who revels in blood; Aahit, the lady of the unusual plants. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The eighteenth pylon is "She who likes fire, who washes her knives, who loves cutting heads, the welcome one, the lady of the palace, who slays her enemies in the evening. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The nineteenth pylon is "She who directs the morning light in her time, and observes the midday heat, the lady of the books written by Thoth himself. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The twentieth pylon is "She who is within the cavern of her lord, who covers her name, and hides what she creates, who takes possession of hearts, which she swallows. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead."

The twenty-first pylon is "She who cuts the stone by her word, and sacrifices him on whom her flames fall. She follows the hidden counsels."

Notes:
- Chapters 145 and 146 are two versions of the same text, describing the arrival of the deceased at the house of Osiris.
- The term "pylon" is used to describe these structures, but they are more like cells, each with an inhabitant.
- There are various versions of these chapters, with the oldest being found in several papyri.
- The text describes the names of the pylons and their doorkeepers, as well as the purifications and anointments the deceased undergoes.
- The deceased is supposed to wear a different garment at each pylon, provided by the pylon itself.
- Chapters 145 and 146 are among the most incorrect texts of the Book of the Dead, and there is a large measure of conjecture in any attempt to translate them.The second gate is guarded by "He Who Shows His Face." The gatekeeper is "He with a Revolving Face," and the herald is "The Consumer." When approaching this gate, the deceased says: "I am Osiris. I am the divine mummy. What I say happens. I will not be turned away. The walls of burning coals show the way in Restau. I have soothed Osiris's pain and supported him. I have made my way to the light of Osiris."

The third gate is guarded by "He Who Eats His Own Filth." The gatekeeper is "The Watchful," and the herald is "The Great One." When approaching this gate, the deceased says: "I am the secret stream, the judge of Rehui. I have come to remove all evil from Osiris. I am girdled and come forth with the double crown. I secured my place in Abydos and opened my path in Restau. I have soothed Osiris's pain and made my way when he shines at Restau."

The fourth gate is guarded by "He Who Opposes Garrulity." The gatekeeper is "The Attentive One," and the herald is "He Who Drives Back the Crocodile." When approaching this gate, the deceased says: "I am the bull, the son of the Kite of Osiris. His father, the Fiery One, sat in judgment. I poised the balance for him. Life has been brought to me. I live forever. I have made my way. I am the son of Osiris, I live forever."

The fifth gate is guarded by "He Who Lives on Worms." The gatekeeper is "The Consuming Flame," and the herald is "The Bow Which Strikes the Furious." When approaching this gate, the deceased says: "I have brought the two jaws of Restau. I have brought the books from Annu and added up his hosts. I have repulsed Apepi and healed the wounds he made. I made my way through you. I am the great one among the Gods. I purified Osiris and restored him as victor. I joined his bones and put together his limbs."

The sixth gate is guarded by "He Who Makes the Loaves, with a Thundering Voice." The gatekeeper is "He Who Shows His Face," and the herald is "The Stolen Knife Which Belongs to the Sky." When approaching this gate, the deceased says: "I come every day, I go. I was created by Anubis, I am the lord of the diadem. I ignore the magic words. I avenge Maat, I avenge his eye. I gave his eye to Osiris himself. I have made my way."

The seventh gate is guarded by "He Who Takes Possession of Their Knives." The gatekeeper is "He with a High Voice," and the herald is "He Who Drives Back the Enemies." When approaching this gate, the deceased says: "I have come to you, Osiris. Pure are your effluxes. You go around and see the sky with Ra. You see mankind, you the only one. You address Ra in the Sektit boat of the sky when he goes around the horizon. I say what I wish, my mummy is mighty. What I say happens like what he says. I will not be turned away from you. I have made my way."

When the deceased arrives at the pylons, he is not turned away or repulsed from Osiris. He is given a place among the glorious ones, the most excellent of them, so that he may have dominion over the first followers of Osiris. Every deceased to whom this chapter is read is like the lord of eternity, he is of one substance with Osiris, and in no place does he have to encounter a great fight.

Chapter 147 is very similar to Chapter 144, but more developed. It also refers to the seven gates. Whenever the deceased approaches one of the gates, he has to say the name of the doorkeeper, which is also the name of the gate itself, as well as the name of the warder and the herald. The deceased also has to address the gate to open it and pass through. The words he utters are found in Chapters 117, 119, and 136B. The two first have nearly the same title, "The Arrival at Restau, near Abydos." If the various parts of the Book of the Dead did not originate in the same place, we can assert that these chapters, as well as those of the gates and the pylons, come from Abydos. The Papyrus of Ani is more complete for Chapter 147 than the Leyden text, which is published in my edition. Therefore, this chapter has been translated from Ani, using the Leyden text whenever Ani is too corrupt.

Chapter 148: Giving sustenance to the deceased in the Netherworld and delivering him from all evil things.

Hail to you who shines as a living soul and appears on the horizon. N, who is in the boat, knows you; he knows your name and the names of the seven cows and their bull. They give bread and drink to the glorified soul. You who give sustenance to the inhabitants of the West, give bread and drink to the soul of N. Grant that he may be your follower and be between your thighs.

(Then follow the names of the seven cows.)

The house of the ka, of the inviolate God,
The storm of the sky, which raises the Gods,
The hidden one in her dwelling,
Chebt, the mummified form of the God,
The greatly beloved, with red hair,
The abundant in life, the veiled one,
She who is powerful in her works, or on her pedestal,
The bull of the Netherworld.

(Then the deceased calls on the four rudders of the sky, the four cardinal points.)

Hail! Divine form, the good one, the good rudder of the Northern sky.
Hail! You who go around and pilot the double earth, the good rudder of the Western sky.
Hail! The shining one, who dwells in the house of the devouring monsters, the good rudder of the Eastern sky.
Hail! The inner one who dwells in the house of the red ones, the good rudder of the Southern sky.

Give bread and drink, oxen, geese, all things good and pure to N. Give him sustenance, give him joy, may he rest on the earth, and may he be victorious on the horizon of Annu, in the Tuat, in the sky, and on the earth, eternally. Ye fathers and mothers, Gods of the sky and the Netherworld, deliver N from all things pernicious and evil, from all harm and evil, from the cruel huntsman and his swords, and from all evil things; and order what is to be done to him by the men, the glorious ones, and the dead, in this day, in this night, in this month, and in this year.

Said by a man when Ra is put before these Gods, painted in green, and standing on a wooden board, and when they give him the offerings and sustenance which is before them, bread and drink, geese, and frankincense, and when they present mortuary gifts to the deceased before Ra. The book called "Giving Sustenance to a Deceased in the Netherworld" delivers a man from all evil things. You shall not read it to any other man than yourself. He to whom this has been read, Ra is his steersman and his protecting power, he will not be attacked by his enemies in the Netherworld, in the sky, on the earth, and in every place he goes, for the book "Giving Sustenance to the Deceased" has its effect regularly.Hatshepsu at Der el Bahari, by Hathor. Several papyri here have the rubric of 30B, with the name of Mycerinus. The rubric translated here is taken from the papyrus of N^i/. Lepsius calls 148c the vignettes belonging to this chapter. In a columned hall stands Osiris, and behind him are the cows, the rudders, and the four Gods of the cardinal points. Sometimes Osiris is left out. In the papyrus of Ani, the God has his hair painted green and stands on a green base.

Chapter 149: The First Domain
In this domain of the Amenta, they live on bread made from the plant tej. Remove your head dress in my presence, for I am the great one among you, the one who joins his bones and firmly establishes his limbs. Ahi, the lord of hearts, came to me, joined my bones, and fixed the diadem of Tmu on me, fastening the head of Nehebkau and establishing my balance. I am lord among the Gods, I am Amsi the builder.

The Second Domain
I am the great proprietor in the garden of Aarru. This garden has steel walls, its wheat is seven cubits high, the ears are two cubits, and the stalks five cubits. The glorified ones, each seven cubits tall, reap them in the presence of Harmachis. I know the inner gate of the garden of Aarru, from which Ra emerges in the East of the sky. The South is by the lake of Cha ru, and the North by the stream of Reu. Ra sails with favoring gales. I am the Teller in the divine ship; I am the unresting navigator in the Bark of Ra. I know the two sycamores of emerald, between which Ra emerges as he advances over what Tmu has lifted up (the firmament) to the Eastern gates of the sky. I know this garden of Aarru of Ra, where the wheat is seven cubits high, the ears are two cubits, and the stalks five cubits. The barley is seven cubits. The glorified ones, each nine cubits tall, reap them in the presence of the powers of the East.

The Third Domain
This domain of the glorious ones is impassable and contains a consuming fire. The faces of the glorious ones look down; make straight your ways and purify your abodes as ordered by Osiris the eternal one. I am the lord of the red crown on the head of the shining one, who gives life to mankind from the heat of his mouth and delivers Ra from Apepi.

The Fourth Domain
This great and lofty mountain of the Netherworld ends at the highest point of the sky. It is three hundred measures long and ten wide. A snake named "He with sharp knives" lives here, seventy cubits in his windings, living by slaughtering the glorious ones and the damned in the Netherworld. I stand on your wall, directing my navigation. I see the way towards you. I gather myself together. I am the man who puts a veil on your head, and I am uninjured. I am the great magician; your eyes have been given to me, and I am glorified through them. Who is he who goes on his belly? Your strength is on your mountain; behold, I march towards it, and your strength is in my hand. I am he who lifts the strength. I have come and taken away the serpents of Ra when he rests with me at eventide. I go around the sky; you are in your valley, as ordered to you before.

The Fifth Domain
This domain of the glorious ones is open to no one. The glorious ones in it have thighs of seven cubits and live on the shades of the motionless. Open the ways to me, that I may appear before you and reach the good Amenta, as ordered by Osiris, the glorious one, the lord of all the glorified. I live off your glory, observing the first day of the month and the half-month on the fifteenth day. I have gone around with the eye of Horus in my power, following Thoth. Any God or damned who opens his devouring mouth against me on this day is struck down on the block.

The Sixth Domain
O Amemhet, sacred more than the hidden Gods and the glorious ones, dreadful to the Gods. The God in it is called Sechez-at. Hail to you, Amemhet. I have come to see the Gods within you. Show your faces and remove your head-dresses in my presence. I have come to make your bread. Sechez-at will not be stronger than I; the slaughterers will not come behind me, the impure ones will not come behind me. I live upon your offerings.

The Seventh Domain
This Ases is too remote to be seen; its heat is that of blazing fire. A serpent named Rerek lives here, with a backbone of seven cubits, living on glorious ones and destroying their glory. Get behind me, Rerek, who is in Ases, who bites with his mouth and paralyzes with his eyes. Your teeth are torn away, your venom is powerless. You shall not come towards me; your venom will not penetrate me. Your poison is fallen and thrown down, and your lips are in a hole. The white serpent has struck his ka, and his ka has struck the white serpent. I shall be protected. His head was cut off by the lynx.

The Eighth Domain
This Hahotep, the very great, has a stream from which nobody takes water for fear of its roaring. The God named the lofty one keeps watch over it so that nobody may come near it. I am the vulture on the stream without end. I brought the things of the world to Tmu when the sailors of Ra are abundantly provided. I have given my strength to the lords of the shrines and the awe I inspire to the lord of all things. I shall not be taken to the block. The pleasure they take in me will not be destroyed. I am the guide on the northern horizon.

The Ninth Domain
This Akset is hidden to the Gods, and the glorious ones are afraid to know its name. No one goes out who goes into it, except this venerable God who inspires fear in the Gods and terror in the glorious ones. Its opening is of fire, and its wind destroys the nostrils. He made it such for his followers so they may not breathe its wind, except this venerable God who comes out of his egg. Hail to you, venerable God, who comes out of his egg. I have come to you to be in your following. I go out of and come into Akset. Open the doors to me, that I may inhale its wind and take the offerings within it.

The Tenth Domain
This city of the Kahu Gods takes hold of the glorious ones and gains mastery over the shades they see with their eyes, who have no connection with the earth. O you who are in your domain, throw yourselves on your bellies, that I may pass near you. My glorious nature will not be taken from me. No one will gain mastery over my shade, for I am the divine hawk rubbed with anti and anointed with incense. Libations have been offered to me; Isis is before me, Nephthys is behind me. The way has been pointed to me by Nau, the bull of Nut and Nehebkau. I have come to you, Gods; deliver me and glorify me with eternal glory.

The Eleventh Domain
This city in the Netherworld, this cavity, masters the glorious ones. No one goes out of those who went into it, from the dread of the appearance of him who is in it. He who sees the God in it, face to face, dies there from his blows, except the Gods who are there and hidden to the glorious ones. O this Atu in the Netherworld. Grant that I may reach them; I am the great magician with his knife; I am issued of Set. I stand on my feet forever. I rise, and I am mighty through this eye of Horus; my heart is raised after it has fallen low. I am glorious in heaven, and I am mighty on earth. I fly like Horus, I cackle like the divine goose. It was given to me to alight near the stream of the lake; I stand near it, I sit near it, I eat of the food in Sechit Hotepit, I go down to the islands of the wandering stars. The doors of the Maati are open to me, and the gates of the upper waters are unbolted to me. I raise my ladder up to the sky to see the Gods. I am one of them, I speak like the divine goose, and I listen to the Gods. I talk aloud, I repeat the words of Sothis.

The Twelfth Domain
This domain of Unt, within Restau, has the heat of fire. No God goes down into it, and the glorious ones do not gather into it, for the four snakes would destroy their names. O this domain of Unt! I am the great among the glorious ones within. I am among the wandering stars. I am not destroyed; my name is not destroyed. Come, divine scent, say the Gods who are in the domain of Unt. I am with you, I live with you, Gods who are within the domain of Unt. You love me more than your Gods. I am with you forever, in the presence of the followers of the great God.

The Thirteenth Domain
This domain of water, which none of the glorious ones can possess, has water of fire, a burning stream, and blazing flame, so they may not drink its water to quench their thirst. The Gods and the glorious ones look at its water from afar, they do not quench their thirst, and their hearts are not set at rest because they may not go near it.The Fourteenth Domain
This domain, Cher-aba, directs the Nile towards Tattu and causes it to flow from Kokekmu. It offers gifts to the dead and the glorious ones. A serpent from the two wells at Elephantine guards the water gate and travels with the Nile, stopping at Cher-aba's stream. Gods of Cher-aba, open your ponds and lakes to me so I may drink, rest, and be nourished. I am the great God in Cher-aba, filled with the vital essence of Osiris. I will not be deprived of it.

Notes
This chapter is frequently found at the end of Theban papyri, detailing the various domains the deceased must reach to enjoy special privileges. The vignettes often depict the domain's layout and colors, typically green or light yellow. Renouf translates "domain" as "residence" or "habitation," indicating an enclosed space with inhabitants. The deceased addresses the domain and its inhabitants without transition.

1. The second domain is the horizon, with the God Harmachis.
2. The third domain is "that of the glorious ones."
3. The moon is mentioned as "on the face of the sun and moon."
4. The deceased, as a magician, can neutralize the serpent's paralyzing eyes.
5. Renouf translates "serpent" or "worms" in different contexts.
6. Secher-remn means "he who knocks down the worm or fishes."
7. The ka and serpent have killed each other.
8. The lynx, or cat, is depicted cutting off the serpent's head.
9. A chapter on the sarcophagus of Amam describes taking the form of a vulture or goose.
10. The ninth domain, Akset, is shaped like a vase touched by a crocodile named Maatetf.
11. Akset was designed to prevent followers from breathing its destructive wind.
12. The tenth domain is at the mouth of the stream.
13. Some words are unclear and untranslated.
14. Destroying a name means complete destruction of the person.
15. Cher-aba is preferred over Cher-aha by some Egyptologists.
16. Kokekmu is believed to be the origin of the rocks mentioned by Herodotus.

Chapter 151
This chapter includes vignettes accompanying Chapter 149, often found at the end of many papyri. It describes fifteen domains, with the fifth divided into two. Four serpents at the corners represent the cardinal points. The domains are named in the following order:

1. The good Amenta, where Gods live on loaves.
2. The garden of Aarru, with the God Ra.
3. The domain of the glorious ones.
4. The high and lofty mountain.
5. The basin with blazing fire, guarded by the bearer of altars.
6. Amemhet, with the God who knocks down fishes.
7. Asset.
8. Hasert, with the bearer of heaven.
9. Akset, with the God Maatetf.
10. The face of the Kahu Gods.
11. Aat, with the God Sothis.
12. The domain of Unt, with the destroyer of souls.
13. The surface of the water, with the mighty power.
14. The domain of Cher-aba, with the God Nile.

Words of Anubis
Your right eye is in the Sektit boat, your left eye in the Atit boat. Your eyebrows are with Anubis, fingers with Thoth, and locks with Ptah Sokaris. They prepare a good path for you and defeat your enemies.

Words of Isis
I come as your protector, with the breath of Tmu. I strengthen your throat and make you like a God, placing your enemies under your feet.

Words of Nephthys
I circle my brother Osiris as your protector, always behind you, hearing Ra and justifying you before the Gods. Arise, justified by all that has been done for you. Ptah has defeated your enemies; you are Horus, son of Hathor. Your head will remain with you forever.

Words of the Northern Wall Figure
I will not let anyone enchain or bind you. I am here to protect you.

Words of the Western Wall Tat
Come quickly and turn away Kep-her's steps. Bring light to his hidden abode. I am behind Tat, protecting you on the day of repelling slaughter.

Words of the Southern Wall Flame
I spread sand around the hidden abode, repelling aggressors and illuminating the mountain. I protect you.

Words of Anubis in Ta-Tsert
I watch over your head. Awake on the mountain, your wrath averted. I protect you.

Words of the Soul Figures
The living soul of N. worships the sun at dawn and Ra at sunset.

Words of the Statuettes
O statuette, if called to work in the Netherworld, I am ready to plant fields, water soil, and move sand.

Words of the Four Cardinal Points Genii
Kebehsenuf: I protect you, join your bones, and strengthen your limbs.
Hapi: I revive your head and limbs, defeat your enemies, and give you your head forever.
Tuamautef: I am Horus, rescuing my father from evildoers.
Emsta: I protect you and ensure your house prospers, as commanded by Ptah and Ra.

Notes
Chapter 151 begins a series of texts found on funeral chamber walls, mummy cloth, or amulets, continuing to Chapter 160. Chapter 151 is more pictorial, representing the funeral chamber.In the middle of the chamber, under a canopy, lies the mummy, with Anubis placing his hands on it. Beneath the bed is a bird with a human head, symbolizing the soul of the deceased. Anubis is likely a priest or family member wearing a jackal's head, reciting words attributed to the God. At the foot of the bed stand the Goddesses Isis and Nephthys. Each of the four walls has a niche for an amulet, as seen in the four oriented steles of Marseilles. The North wall features a human figure, the South a flame, the East a jackal, and the West a Tat. The chamber also contains four canopic vases with the Gods of the cardinal points, each delivering their own words. Additionally, there are statuettes called shabti or ushabti, helpers of the deceased in the afterlife. In the London papyrus, one statuette has the usual appearance, while another has the head of Anubis. The soul of the deceased is believed to be in the chamber, worshipping the rising and setting sun. Few papyri have this chapter as complete as the London version, which serves as the standard for text and vignettes. The Turin version is much shorter. The papyrus of Ani contains texts for the four walls with rubrics similar to those in Marseilles, forming a special chapter joined to Chapter 137a, titled "What is done secretly in the Tuat, the mysteries of the Tuat, the introduction into the mysteries of the Netherworld." To aid understanding, the words spoken by various figures are lettered.

1. Renouf would have translated "thy eyebrows are those of Anubis," but the following chapter shows it should be "with Anubis," meaning under his protection.
2. The rubrics state the figure is made of palm wood and is seven fingers high.
3. The rubric for the Tat says it is made of crystal with gold branches, wrapped in fine linen. Another chapter (Chapter 155) describes a different Tat placed on the deceased's neck.
4. The flame is described as a torch made of reeds.
5. The Anubis figure is made of clay.
6. Words are engraved on the funerary statuettes, an abridged form of Chapter 6, for which Renouf's translation is used.

Chapter CLII: The Chapter of Building a House on Earth
Seb rejoices as N. is set in motion with his vital power, giving men and Gods their creative strength. There is cheering when Seshait approaches Seb, and Anubis commands N. to build a house on earth with foundations like On and a circuit like Cher-aba. The God of the sanctuary should reside within. Osiris tells the Gods to come quickly and see the house built for the glorified, who comes every day. They should hold him in awe and give him praise. Osiris brings cattle, the south wind brings grain, and the north wind brings barley. Osiris is exalted, surrounded by applause from men, Gods, and Chus.

Chapter CLIIIa: The Chapter of Coming Out of the Net
The deceased addresses the mighty-hearted one who spreads his net and enters the earth, declaring that the fishermen will not catch him in their net or carry him away. He will escape the net's meshes and shine like Hunnu (Sokaris) and Sebak. He knows the fork, the stake, and the names of the net's components, all linked to divine figures. The deceased will shine like Horus, govern the land, and be introduced into the house of the Prince. He comes as a fisher, equipped with a fork, blade, and knife, ready to entangle in his net. He knows the names of the net's parts and the fishermen, who are ancestors of Ra and Seb. The deceased declares that he will not be caught in the net, asserting his divine knowledge and power.You won't trap me in your net, which catches the weak and those in the earth. I know the net, its frame above, and its weights below. I come with my stake, point, and blade in hand. I arrive to bind and place it. My knife is sharpened and ready. The stake in my hand is the thigh of Nemu; the fork is the fingers of Sokaris; the point is the claws of Isis; the blade is the knife of Nemu. I come, sit in Ra's boat, and sail on the celestial lakes. I hear the Gods' words, do as they do, praise them, and live as they live. N. appears on the ladder made by his father Ra, with Horus and Sut holding him.

Notes:
In the Theban version, the Chapter of the Net is split into two parts, 153A and 153B, with different titles and illustrations. 153A is about escaping the net, depicted as a clap-net for waterfowl. 153B is about escaping fish catchers, shown with a drag-net containing fish, drawn by apes. Originally, one chapter might have been for fowlers and the other for fishermen, but they are now combined in the best-preserved texts. The text of 153A is corrupt and varies significantly between documents, indicating a loss of understanding. The Turin text only contains 153A, much shorter, followed by a rubric absent in the Theban version. The translation is based on three main documents. The vignette in the Louvre papyrus shows a clap-net drawn by four men, with the deceased holding two instruments mentioned in the text. In the London papyrus, the deceased is seen drawing the net's rope.

Among the dangers for the deceased is being caught in a net by hidden spirits, treated like waterfowl or fish. But he escapes because he knows the mystical names of the fowlers, fishermen, and the net's parts, giving him magical power. The instrument in the deceased's hand, though determinative of wood, may be a general weapon, like a bident for spearing fish. The stake or peg in the London vignette is a dagger, with a pointed head and blade. Nemu might be a local name for Horus. The God in lion form is the Sphinx. The late recension of Chapter 153 ends here, followed by a rubric: Said on a figure of the deceased in a boat, with the Ssktit boat on the right and the Atit boat on the left. Offerings of cakes, beer, and good things are made on Osiris's birth day. The one who receives these will live forever and not die again.

The word "marked" means to mark an object for religious purposes or as property. Fishes are marked on the tail. There is an opposition between "those who are" and "those who are not," meaning future ones. The negative often expresses the future, what is to come. An official of the 12th dynasty says the king made him commissioner of present and future work. Isis issues directions for what is and what will be. The first beings or creatures are sometimes mentioned before the Gods.

Chapter CLIIIb: Escaping from Fish Catchers
O snarers, fowlers, fishers, sons of their fathers, do you know what I know? The name of the great net is the embracer. The name of its cordage is the bonds of Isis. The name of its stake is the thigh of Tmu. The name of the fork is the finger of Nemu. The name of its point is the nail of Ptah. The name of its blade is the knife of Isis. The name of its weight is the iron in the sky. The name of its flowers is the feathers of the hawk. The name of the fisherman is the cynocephalus. The name of the ground, where its limits are, is the house of the moon. The name of the one who fishes there is the great prince who sits on the east of the sky. I am Ra, who proceeds from Nu, and my soul is divine. I produce food but reject what is wrong. I am Osiris, possessor of Maat, and I live by it daily. I am eternal, like the bull, feared by the Gods in my name of the eternal one. I am self-originating with Nu, in my name of Chepera, born daily. I am the lord of Daylight, shining like Ra, who gives me life in his risings in the East. I come to heaven, take my place in the East. The children of the great God nourish me with sacred offerings. I eat and ease myself like Shu. The king of Egypt (Osiris) is present. Khonsu and Thoth's laws are within me, imparting warmth to the heavenly host.

Notes:
This chapter is found in two papyri: Paris, III, 93, and the Papyrus of Nu, both with some errors. The first part is a list of the net's parts, similar to 153A. The vignette shows a drag-net drawn by three dog-headed apes. The old participial form means "do you know well?" or "are you certain to know?" The word likely means papyrus flowers tied to the net. The discrepancies between texts are significant, making translation difficult. The following lines are an abridged version of Chapter 85, using Renouf's translation. The bull of Amenta, Osiris, is mentioned in the first chapter.Chapter CLIV: The Chapter of Preventing the Body from Decaying in the Underworld

Greetings, my father Osiris. I have come to embalm you. Embalm this body of mine, for I am perfect like my father Chepera, who does not know decay. Come, take hold of my breath of life, lord of breath, exalted above all. Revive me, build me up, lord of the funeral chest. Allow me to enter the land of eternity, as you do when you are with your father Tmu, whose body never decays. I have not done what you hate; I follow the commands that your ka loves. I have not transgressed them. I have been saved, being your follower, O Tmu, from the decay that affects every God, Goddess, animal, and creeping thing. After their souls depart, they die and decay; their bones rot, their flesh becomes a foul liquid, and they turn into a mass of worms. But as for me, there are no worms. Whoever loses the eye of Shu among all beings becomes powerless. I cause them to crawl before me; they recognize me and fear me. All beings are alike dead among animals, birds, fish, snakes, and worms; their life is like death. Let there be no food for the worms. Let them not come to me when they are born. I shall not be handed over to the destroyer who corrupts and dismembers bodies. He who follows his commands lives, but I have not been delivered into his hands, for I am under your command, lord of the Gods. Greetings, my father Osiris! Your limbs are lasting; you do not know decay. There are no worms with you; you are not repugnant, you do not stink, you do not rot, you do not become worms. I am Chepera; my limbs are lasting forever. I do not know decay. I do not rot, I do not putrefy, I do not become worms. I do not lose the eye of Shu. I am, I am, I live, I live, I grow, I grow, and when I awake in peace, I shall not be in decay. I shall not be destroyed in my bandages. I shall be free of pestilence; my eye will not be corrupted, my skin will not disappear. My ear will not be deaf, my head will not be taken from my neck, my tongue will not be torn away, my hair will not be cut off, my eyebrows will not be shaved off. No grievous harm shall come upon me; my body is firm and shall not be destroyed. It shall not perish in this earth forever.

Notes:
This chapter is rarely found in papyri; it was written on the wrappings and bandages of the dead, such as on the funeral cloth of King Thothmes III, where it is incomplete. This chapter is interesting as it shows how repulsive the idea of decay was to the Egyptians, which is described here in very realistic terms. This is one reason why they valued mummification so highly. Parts of this chapter are very obscure. The translation is based on the text on the mummy cloth of Thothmes III, supplemented by the Papyrus of Nu. The only vignette we have is from the Turin Papyrus, showing a mummy lying on a bed, illuminated by the rays of the sun.

Chapter CLV: The Chapter of the Tat of Gold

Here is your backbone, still-heart! Here is your spine, still-heart! Put it close to you. I have given you the water you need. Here it is. I have brought you the Tat, which makes your heart rejoice. Said on a Tat of gold inlaid into sycamore wood and dipped into the juice of ankhamu. If it is put on the neck of this deceased, he arrives at the doors of the Tuat and comes forth by day, even if he is silent. The Tat is placed on the first day of the year, as is done for the followers of Osiris.

Notes:
After the interruption due to Chapters 153 and 154, we return to the series started by Chapter 151, describing the chamber where the mummy is placed and the funeral equipment of the deceased, including his amulets and ornaments. The Louvre papyrus III, 93 (Pb), combines several of these chapters into one, titled "The Description of the Hidden Things of the Tuat," with a vignette showing three figures from Chapter 151: the statuette, the torch or flame, and Anubis, along with two Tat of different materials, one for the wall and one for the neck of the deceased, and a buckle. The vignette of Chapter 155 shows a Tat of gold. The various versions of the chapter differ mainly in the rubric. I followed the papyrus of Nebseni (Aa), filling in gaps from other texts.

Chapter CLVI: The Chapter of the Buckle of Carnelian

The blood of Isis, the virtue of Isis; the magic power of Isis, the magic power of the Eye protect this Great one; they prevent any harm from coming to him. This chapter is said on a buckle of carnelian dipped into the juice of ankhamu, inlaid into sycamore wood, and placed on the neck of the deceased. Whoever has this chapter read to him is protected by the virtue of Isis: Horus, the son of Isis, rejoices in seeing him, and no path is barred to him, unfailingly.

Notes:
M. Maspero, who studied this chapter in detail, has shown that there are several versions. This, likely the oldest, is taken from the papyrus of Nebseni, with a few additions from texts of the same date. The protective power of the buckle is shown in the vignette of Chapter 93, where a buckle with human hands grasps the deceased by the left arm, preventing him from moving towards the East.

Chapter CLVII: The Chapter of the Vulture of Gold

Isis has arrived; she hovers over the dwellings, searching all the hidden abodes of Horus when he emerges from the Northern marshes, knocking down those with evil faces. She causes him to join the Bark and grants him sovereignty over the...Chapter CLVIII: The Chapter of the Gold Collar

O my father! My brother! My mother Isis! I am unveiled and I am seen. I am one of the unveiled ones who see Seb. This is said on a gold collar, on which this chapter is written, and placed on the neck of the deceased on the day of burial.

Chapter CLIX: The Chapter of the Green Felspar Column

O you who come out every day in the divine house, she who has a big voice, who goes around, she takes hold of the potent formulae of her father, the mummy which is on the bull. She is Renent. This is said on a column of green felspar, on which this chapter is written, and placed on the neck of the deceased.

Notes:
The vignette of this chapter and the next shows a miniature column or tent-pole with a papyrus capital and papyrus leaves at the base. This chapter is taken from the Turin text; parts of it are quite unintelligible. The mineral mentioned has not yet been determined. Brugsch calls it "Opal," Lepsius thought its color was blue, Dr. Budge translates it as "mother-of-emerald," and Renouf's translation is "green felspar."

Chapter CLX: Giving the Column of Green Felspar

I am the column of green felspar, which cannot be crushed, and which is raised by the hand of Thoth. Injury is an abomination for it. If it is safe, I am safe; if it is not injured, I am not injured; if it receives no cut, I receive no cut. Said by Thoth: arise, come in peace, lord of Heliopolis, lord who resides at Pu. When Shu has arrived, he found the stone at Shenemu, as its name is neshem. The deceased makes his abode in the enclosure of the great God, while Tmu resides in his dwelling; his limbs will never be crushed.

Notes:
For Chapter 160, we have a text from London, 9900 (Aa); it is not complete, but the gaps can easily be filled from the Papyrus Busca. The vignette of Aa represents Thoth bringing the column, enclosed in a box or a casket. The symbolic expressions of this chapter mean that the neshem, of which the column is made, is a very hard stone, proof against any injury. The power of the amulet consists in making the body of the deceased as hard as neshem.

Chapter CLXI: The Chapter of Unfastening the Opening in the Sky

Thoth does it so that it may be finished when he opens the sky with Aten. Ra is living, the tortoise is dead. The body has been offered in the earth; the bones have been offered of N. [The West wind of Isis]. Ra is living, the tortoise is dead. It is safe that is in the funeral chest of N. [The East wind of Nephthys.] Ra is living, the tortoise is dead, the limbs are well wrapped up. Kebehsenef is to keep watch over them for N. [The North wind of Osiris.] Ra is living, the tortoise is dead. His wrappings have been opened; they reveal his figure. [The South wind of Ra.] Everybody who has these figures on his coffin, the four openings of the sky are open to him; one in the North, it is the wind of Osiris; one in the South, it is the wind of Aah (the moon); one in the West, it is the wind of Isis; one in the East, it is the wind of Nephthys. Every one of these winds, which are at his entrance when he wants it, breathes into his nostrils. Let no one outside know it, it is a mystery which is not known to the common people. Do not reveal it to anyone, may he be thy father or thy son, except thyself. It is a real mystery, and every one of these things is unknown to all men.

Notes:
This chapter is so short in the old recension (Paris, III, 93) that it could hardly be understood without the rubric of the Turin text. The four Thoths, each of whom opens a door, are the four winds, coming from the four cardinal points. We have already learned from Chapter 59 that it is one of the privileges of the deceased to have the command of the four winds.

Chapter CLXII: Chapter of Causing a Flame to Arise Under the Head of the Deceased

Hail to thee, thou lion, thou mighty one, with high plumes, the lord of the double crown, who waves the flail, thou art the lord of the phallus, thou art vigorous when the morning light arises, to the rays of which there is no limit. Thou art the lord of forms, with numerous colors, who conceals himself within his eye to his children. Thou art the mighty enchanter among the cycle of the Gods, thou swift runner, with quick strides. Thou art the mighty God who comes to him who calls for him, who delivers the oppressed from his tortures. Come to my voice. I am the cow. Thy name is in my mouth. I am going to utter it. Hakahaka is thy name. Furaa is thy name. Aakarsa is thy name. Ankrobata is thy name. Khermauserau is thy name. Kharosata is thy name. I adore thy name. I am the cow. Listen to my voice, on the day when thou puttest a flame under the head of Ra. Behold he is in the Tuat, and he is mighty in Heliopolis. Grant that he may be like one who is on earth. He is thy son, who loves thee. Do not ignore his name. Come to Osiris N. Grant that a flame may arise under his head, for he is the soul of the great body which rests in Heliopolis; the shining one, the form of the firstborn is his name. Barokatat'aua is his name. Come, grant him to be like one of thy followers, for he is even as thou art. Said on the image of a cow, made of pure gold, to be put on the neck of the deceased. Also if it is painted on new papyrus, and put under his head, there will be a quantity of flames all around him like those that are on earth. This is a very great protection, which the cow granted to her son Ra, after he had gone to rest. His abode is surrounded by warriors of blazing fire. If thou puttest this Goddess on the neck of the King who is on earth, he is like fire in pursuing his enemies, his horses cannot stop. If thou puttest it on the neck of a man after his death, he is mighty in the Netherworld. Nobody will drive him away from the gates of the Tuat undeviatingly. And thou shall say when thou puttest this Goddess on the neck of the deceased: O Amon of Amons, thou who art in the sky, turn thy face towards the body of thy son, make him sound in the Netherworld. This book is most secret. Do not let it be seen by any man, for it is forbidden to know it. Let it be hidden. It is called the book of the mistress of the hidden abode. This is the end.

Notes:
Chapters 162-165 are of a very late date. They are of a different character from the other chapters of the Book of the Dead. They belong rather to the magic books of the old Egyptians. When they were written, there was a decay in the religion, which drifted more and more into magic, for which the Egyptians were famous under the Roman Empire. We find there a great number of barbarous words unintelligible to us, and probably also to the old scribes, since they differ widely according to the papyri. They remind us of those found in the magical texts. It is probable that Chapter 162 is older than the following; several papyri end with it, and it has the rubric "this is the end," which is found in the older texts after Chapter 149. The late Dr. Pleyte, of Leyden, made a special study of these chapters, and of several others of late date. The collation which he published of various documents is the text on which this translation has been made. The vignette generally consists of a cow, having between her horns a solar disk, with two plumes. Occasionally behind her, there is a Goddess with a cow's head having the same attribute. This cow is considered to be the Goddess Nut, the mother of Ra. An image of the cow, made of pure gold, is to be put on the neck of the deceased; or, what would be much easier and cheaper, it is to be painted on a hypocephalus of new papyrus, and put under the deceased's head. Part of this chapter is the usual text found on the hypocephali. The result of the gift of one of these amulets will be that in the Netherworld the deceased will be surrounded by flames. This is the effect of the presence of the amulets here described. It does not take place in this world, but in the other, where Ra himself enjoys a similar protection, being surrounded by "warriors of blazing fire."This image likely represents the stunning sunsets often seen in Egypt. All translators have interpreted the term as "heat," referring to the body's vital heat. However, the true meaning is "flame," implying a large quantity of flames that will protect the deceased. The lion addressed by the cow, a God of light and fire, is probably Ra himself.

Chapter CLXIII: Preventing a Body from Decaying in the Afterlife

This chapter discusses how to prevent a body from decaying in the afterlife, rescuing it from soul-devouring entities, and protecting it from evil Gods. The deceased can move freely and do as they please without restraint. The soul of the great body in Arohabu protects the body of Hanirta, the lord of motion, who rests in the marshes of Senhakarokana.

The text calls upon the soul of souls to deliver Osiris N. from the God with a terrifying face, who consumes souls with flames from their mouths. The chapter emphasizes the importance of protecting Osiris N. from enemies and restoring his soul to his body.

The chapter also mentions a serpent with two legs and a two-horned disk, symbolizing protection. If this text is read on earth, it protects a person from hidden dangers and evil spirits. The amulet described in the text has protective powers both on earth and in the afterlife.

Chapter CLXIV: Another Chapter

This chapter praises Sekhet, Bast, daughter of Ra, and other deities. It describes their roles in protecting the deceased and ensuring their safe passage in the afterlife. The text emphasizes the power and valor of these deities, who protect the deceased from evil spirits and ensure their well-being in the eternal abode.

The chapter also describes a Mut with three faces, symbolizing protection and power. The deceased wrapped in these bandages will be mighty among the Gods in the Netherworld, never repulsed, and will enjoy eternal life and prosperity.Chapter CLXV: Ensuring the Body Thrives in the Afterlife

This chapter focuses on ensuring the body remains intact and prospers in the afterlife. It calls upon the God Amon, known for his mysterious forms and hidden colors, to protect the deceased. The text emphasizes the importance of knowing Amon's names and forms, which are believed to shield the deceased and grant them eternal rest in the Tuat (the underworld). The chapter also describes specific rituals and amulets that should be used to protect the body from harm and ensure it remains whole and powerful.

Chapter CLXVI: The Pillow

This chapter, often found in tombs, is about awakening and triumphing over suffering. It invokes Ptah, who has defeated the enemies of the deceased, and Horus, whose head was restored after being severed. The text assures that the deceased's head will remain intact and they will be victorious in the afterlife.

Chapter CLXVII: Restoring the Eye

This chapter recounts how Thoth restored the Eye after it was wounded by Ra, calming its fury. It symbolizes the restoration and healing of the deceased, ensuring they are whole and sound.

Chapter CLXVIII: Gods and Genii of the Tuat

This chapter, not originally part of the Book of the Dead, describes various Gods and genii in the Tuat who bestow blessings on the deceased. It includes vignettes of these deities and mentions the libations made by Osiris N., who is now the lord of abundance.

Chapter CLXIX: Raising the Funereal Bed

This chapter describes the deceased as a lion, a sphinx, and Horus, who avenges his father. It speaks of the deceased's journey, their body being nourished and purified, and their soul residing in the sky. The text emphasizes the deceased's strength, purity, and eternal existence, free from judgment and imprisonment.Chapter CLXX: Arranging the Funereal Bed

Your limbs are restored, and your bones are set. The earth protects your flesh. You are like Horus within the egg; when you rise, you see the divine body of Ra and move towards the horizon, to the place you desire. There are cheers and welcomes, with offerings on the altar. Horus lifts you as he did for Osiris in the sacred abode. Hail, Osiris, you are reborn. Anubis on his mountain ensures your bandages grow. Ptah Sokaris allows you to touch the divine house's ornaments. Thoth brings you divine words, guiding you to the sky's horizon where your spirit wishes to be, just as he did for Osiris. Your white diadem is on your brow. Nemu is with you, granting you leadership. Hail, rise on your bed and come forth. Ra lifts you on the horizon in his boat. Hail, you are raised by Imu, granting you eternal endurance. Hail, you are raised by Amsu of Koptos, adored by the shrine's Gods. Hail, blessed be your peaceful arrival at your eternal house and monument. Salutations in Pu Tepu, in the shrine your spirit loves. Your soul is mighty, raised from your resting place, greater than the victim embraced by the Gods. You are like the God who creates beings, more admirable than the Gods. Your splendor surpasses the Glorified, your spirits are mightier. Hail, you are raised by Ptah Anebefres, placing your dwelling before the Gods. Hail, you are Horus, son of Osiris, created by Nut. You shine like Ra on the horizon, lighting the earth with your rays. The Gods invite you to see your eternal house. Rennut, the great one, who conceived Tmu, raises you. I am the second outcome of the sky, the third of the light-maker. I emerged from the womb, an infant like my father, with no perverse actions in my life.

Chapter CLXXI: Wrapping the Deceased in a Pure Garment

O Tmu, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Sut, Nephthys, Horus of the two Horizons, Hathor in the great dwelling, Chepera, Mentu lord of Thebes, Amon lord of Nestaui, great and small cycles of Gods, Gods and Goddesses from Nu, Sebek of Shet, Sebek in all his names and abodes, Gods of the South and North, Gods in heaven and on earth, grant a pure garment to the mighty Chu N. Make him glorious and remove all wrongs. This pure garment is his forever, for eternity, cleansing all wrongs.

Chapter CLXXII: Reciting Ceremonies in the Netherworld

With incense, I inhale the smell of natron and incense, purified by sacred utterances from my mouth. I am pure, like the fishes in the river, towards the statue in the house of purification. The words of N. are pure. Blessed be you, N., pleasing to Ptah, Anebefres, all Gods, and Goddesses. Your beauty is like a calm stream, like the finest water, like a festival hall where everyone...Chapter CLXX: Arranging the Funereal Bed

Your body is restored, and your bones are set. The earth protects your flesh. You are like Horus in the egg; when you rise, you see the divine body of Ra and move towards the horizon, to the place you desire. There are cheers and welcomes, with offerings on the altar. Horus lifts you as he did for Osiris in the sacred abode. Hail, Osiris, you are reborn. Anubis on his mountain ensures your bandages grow. Ptah Sokaris allows you to touch the divine house's ornaments. Thoth brings you divine words, guiding you to the sky's horizon where your spirit wishes to be, just as he did for Osiris. Your white diadem is on your brow. Nemu is with you, granting you leadership. Hail, rise on your bed and come forth. Ra lifts you on the horizon in his boat. Hail, you are raised by Imu, granting you eternal endurance. Hail, you are raised by Amsu of Koptos, adored by the shrine's Gods. Hail, blessed be your peaceful arrival at your eternal house and monument. Salutations in Pu Tepu, in the shrine your spirit loves. Your soul is mighty, raised from your resting place, greater than the victim embraced by the Gods. You are like the God who creates beings, more admirable than the Gods. Your splendor surpasses the Glorified, your spirits are mightier. Hail, you are raised by Ptah Anebefres, placing your dwelling before the Gods. Hail, you are Horus, son of Osiris, created by Nut. You shine like Ra on the horizon, lighting the earth with your rays. The Gods invite you to see your eternal house. Rennut, the great one, who conceived Tmu, raises you. I am the second outcome of the sky, the third of the light-maker. I emerged from the womb, an infant like my father, with no perverse actions in my life.

Chapter CLXXI: Wrapping the Deceased in a Pure Garment

O Tmu, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Sut, Nephthys, Horus of the two Horizons, Hathor in the great dwelling, Chepera, Mentu lord of Thebes, Amon lord of Nestaui, great and small cycles of Gods, Gods and Goddesses from Nu, Sebek of Shet, Sebek in all his names and abodes, Gods of the South and North, Gods in heaven and on earth, grant a pure garment to the mighty Chu N. Make him glorious and remove all wrongs. This pure garment is his forever, for eternity, cleansing all wrongs.

Chapter CLXXII: Reciting Ceremonies in the Netherworld

With incense, I inhale the smell of natron and incense, purified by sacred utterances from my mouth. I am pure, like the fishes in the river, towards the statue in the house of purification. The words of N. are pure. Blessed be you, N., pleasing to Ptah, Anebefres, all Gods, and Goddesses. Your beauty is like a calm stream, like the finest water, like a festival hall where everyone...

Your beauty is like the pillars of Ptah, like the shoots of the maut plant of Ra. N. is the pillar of Ptah and the ewer of Anebefres. O you who are called aloud, you who are called aloud, you the lamented, you are glorified, you are exalted, you are glorious, you are strong. O you who are raised up, you are raised up, N. has been raised up by means of all the manifold ceremonies done to him; your enemies are struck down; Ptah has struck down your enemies, you are victorious and you have dominion over them. Your words are listened to, what you have ordered is done, you are raised, you are triumphant before the Circles of Gods attached to every God and every Goddess. O you who are called aloud, second verse. Your head is woven by a woman from Asia; your face shines brighter than the moon; the top of your head is lapis blue; your hair is darker than the doors of the Tuat, your hair is black like the night; your forehead is adorned with blue; the rays of Horus are on your face. Your garments are of gold; Horus has decked them with blue; your eyebrows, the two sisters joined together; Horus has adorned them with blue; your nose inhales the perfume and your nostrils are like the winds in the sky. Your eyes are the seers of the hill of Bachau, your upper eyelids are enduring forever; their lashes are of real lapis; your pupils are pleasant gifts, and your lower eyelids are painted with antimony. Your lips utter for you words of truth, they repeat the words of truth of Ra which are well pleasing to the Gods. Your teeth are the two heads of the serpent by which the two Gods are seized, your tongue is voluble; your voice is more shrill than that of the bird in the marshes; your ears are well established at their place, they go with you to the land of Amenta. O you who are called aloud, third verse. Your neck is adorned with gold, it is girt with electron; your throat and your lungs are like Anubis; your backbone is like the Uat' Goddesses; your back is lined with gold and girt with electron; your loins are like Nephthys, a Nile which is flowing. Your buttocks are two eggs of crystal, your legs are well fastened for walking, you are sitting in your place you have received from the Gods your two eyes. O you who are called aloud, fourth verse. Your throat is like Anubis, your limbs are necklaces made of gold; your breasts are two eggs of crystal which Horus has painted blue, your forearms are adorned with topaz, your shoulders are well established on their base; your heart is happy every day, your whole heart is the work of the two divine Powers, your body worships the stars of the Gods above and below; for your belly is like a calm sky, and your bowels are the Tuat which nobody can fathom, and which sends out light in the dark night; its offerings are eatable plants. He (N.) praises the Majesty of Thoth, saying: the desires of his beautiful person take place in my tomb; as my God commanded me. Every pure thing he loves is there. O you who are called aloud, fifth verse. Your thighs are a pond in a time of abundant inundation; a pond which is lined by the children of the God of water; your legs which go to and fro are of gold; your knees are lentisks in the marshes; your feet are firm every day; your shin-bones lead you on the right path. Your arms are pillars on their bases; your fingers are of gold; their nails are like knives of flint in what they do for you. O you who are called aloud, sixth verse. You put on the pure garment and you divest your apron when you stretch yourself on the funereal bed; haunches are cut for your Aa, and a heart is offered unto your mummy. You receive a bandage of the finest linen from the hands of the attendant of Ra; you eat on your resting couch bread which has been baked by the fire Goddess herself; you eat the haunch, you seize the meat which has been prepared by Ra in his holy place; you wash your feet in silver basins made by the skillful artist Sokaris; you eat bread placed on the altar, and prepared by the holy fathers, you live upon baked cakes and hot drinks from the store-house; you inhale the smell of flowers; your heart is not reluctant at the sight of offerings; your ministrants make for you the loaves and the cakes of the Powers of Heliopolis; and they themselves bring you the sacred things; your offerings have been chosen for you; and your ordinances are in the gates of the Great Dwelling; you rise like Sahu and you arrive like the morning star; Nut stretches forth her arms towards you; Sahu, the son of Ra, and Nut, the mother of the Gods, the two great Gods of the sky, they speak one to another saying: Take him in your arms; I have brought in my arms the form of N. in the happy day when he is glorified, when his memory is recorded, when he is in the mouth of all generations. You, raised one, you hear how you are glorified throughout all your house. O you who are called aloud, seventh verse. Anubis has given him his shroud; he has done all that pleased him; the high-priest has prepared his ribbon; for he is the provider of the great God; you go and wash yourself in the lake of Perfection, you make offerings in the house of the Gods of the sky, and you propitiate the lord of Heliopolis; you receive the water of Ra in ewers, and milk in large vases. O you raised one, you make offerings on the altar, and you wash your feet upon the stone of, on the banks of the divine lake; you come forth and you see Ra upon the four pillars which are the arms of the sky; on the head of Anmutef, and on the arms of Apuat who opens for you the path; you see the horizon where are all the sacred things which you desire. O you who are called aloud, eighth verse. All the good things have been spread out for you, before Ra. You have a beginning and you have an end as Horus and Thoth have ordered for you. They call upon N., they see how he is glorious, they give him to come forth like a God to meet the Powers of Heliopolis. You journey on the great path as your mummy has received the sacred things from your father; your hands are wrapped in linen every day; the beginning of the journey of the God is at the gate of the Great Dwelling, O you who are called aloud, ninth verse. N. breathes the air for his nose and for his nostrils, he receives a thousand geese and sixty baskets of all things good and pure; your enemies have been struck down; they are no more."I have anointed you with holy oil. I have brought you the offering that destroys your face. (2) Notes: This chapter is also found in London 9900. The vignette at the end shows Osiris sitting in a shrine. Before him are offerings of fowl and cattle presented by Horus to his father. At the beginning, the deceased is seen with raised arms, symbolizing Horus, with the following words above him: 'Adoration to Osiris, Khenta Amenta, the great God, the lord of Abydos, king forever, prince of eternity, the venerable God in Restau, pronounced by N. I give you grain, lord of the Gods, the one God who lives on justice. I am your son Horus. I have come to you. I avenge you, I bring you Maat, to the place where the circle of your Gods is. Grant me to be among your followers and to smite your enemies. I have established your food offerings on the earth forever.' This chapter was first published and translated in Zeitschrift, Vol. XIII, p. 83. 1. These words are repeated before every sentence. 2. This sentence is abridged. The full version from the Ritual at Abydos reads: 'I have anointed your head with the oil of Horus' brow; if it is destroyed there (on his brow), he is destroyed as a God; i.e., his divinity is destroyed.' 

Chapter CLXXIV: Chapter of causing the Chii to come out of the great door in the sky. It is read (1) to you by your son (Horus). The great ones tremble when they see the sword in your hand as you emerge from the Tuat. Hail to you, the wise one, created by Seb, born of Nut. The cycles of the Gods are at rest. Horus rests in his dwelling (2), Tum rests in his abode (?). All the Gods of East and West rest in the great Goddess (3) of birth, between the arms of her who gave birth to the God. When I am born, I see and recognize where I am. I have been raised in my place. The order has been accomplished by her who hates sleep and depression, and who stands in Utenet. My bread comes from Pu, and I receive my form in Heliopolis. Horus, following the command from his father, the lord of clouds, Astes, raised him, and I have been raised by Tmu. I am the great one. I come forth between the legs of the cycle of the Gods. I have been conceived by Sechet, and Shestet (4) gave me birth to be her star, Sothis, the first one, the great walker who brings Ra through the sky every day. I have come to my abode. I have united the two diadems. I shine like a star. O ye flowers, the name of which is 'the precious bunch,' I am the lotus that comes out of the holy earth; when I am plucked, I settle myself at the nostrils of the Great Figure. I have come out of the lake of flame, I have received justice instead of evil. I am near the white cloth (5), and I keep watch over the Urrei in the night of the great flood of tears. (6) I shine like Nefertmu, the lotus at the nostril of Ra when he comes forth on the horizon every day, and the Gods are purified by his sight. N. is triumphant among the ka, smiting the hearts through his great wisdom. He is near the God, he is the Sau (7) (the knowing one) at the western (right) side of Ra. I have come to my abode among the ka, uniting the hearts through my great wisdom. I am Sau near the God, at the western side of Ra; my sceptre (?) is in my hand. I am called the great favorite, as I am clad in red garments. I am Sau, on the western side of Ra, with a stout heart in the cave of Nu. Notes: This chapter is already found in the pyramid of Unas (1. 379-399). Prof. Erman (Zeitschr., XXXIII, p. 2) has made a special study of it and pointed out that the title of this chapter originates from a misunderstanding of the word o M, which should be a star and not a gate or a door. Were it not for the vignette, which shows the deceased, the woman Muthotepet, coming out of a door, we would translate: 'Chapter of the coming forth of the Chu as a great star in the sky,' in accordance with these words found in the chapter: 'Shestet gave me birth to be her star, Sothis,' etc. Only two papyri contain this chapter, one in London and one in Paris. The London text has a vignette with these words: 'the coming out of the door in the sky by ...' 1. M. Maspero translates: 'your son has made (the sacrifice).' The word is used here as in the rubric of Chapter 141, 'to say, to speak.' This speech is a ceremonial act, one of the v\\ done for the deceased. 2. We noticed before (Chapter 160, note 2) that is a variant for when applying to Tmu. Here it applies to Horus. The unknown word [ [ [ being parallel, I give it conjecturally a similar sense. 3. 'the great one, the great Goddess,' and its variants occur frequently in the Book of the Dead and seem to be a name of the sky. 4. which is found in the papyrus, is clearly a mistake for the name of the Goddess Shestet, which we read in the text of Unas. 5. Perhaps a tent in which he will shelter the Ursei. 6. See note 1, Chapter 4, and Z//^ IVor/i, Vol. III, p. 46. I suppose it means here a heavy rain. 7. In the pictures in the royal tombs, the sun-God stands in his boat between and . Here it is said that Sau is at the West of Ra, meaning on his right side. Ra is spoken of here as if he were a human being, turning towards the South as all Egyptians did. His west is his right-hand side. Even now, the Egyptian fellaheen in their language do not often say right and left; they generally use the points of the compass: west of you, etc.

Chapter CLXXV: Chapter of not dying a second death in the Netherworld. O Thoth (1)! What has become of the children of Nut? They have stirred up hostilities, raised storms, committed iniquity, raised rebellion, perpetrated murder, and done oppression. The strong have acted against the weak in all they have done to me. Grant, O Thoth, what Tmu has decreed. You do not see the iniquities, you are not pained by their attacks on the years and their invasions on the months, because they have done their mischiefs in secret. I am your pallet, O Thoth, and I bring you your inkstand; I am not one of those who do mischief in secret. Let no mischief be done to me. O Tmu! What is this place to which I have journeyed? It is without water and without air! It is all abyss, utter darkness, sheer perplexity. One lives here in peace of heart. There is no pleasure of love here. Let there be granted to me glory instead of water, air, and pleasures of love; and peace of heart instead of bread and beer. [Decree this, Tmu, that if I see your face, I shall not be pained by your sufferings (2). Tmu decrees; behold, the great Gods have given him this mission, he will reign on his throne, and he will inherit his throne in the Isle of Fire: and for you, I decree that the God may see him as his second self, and that my face may see your face. My lord Tmu, what is the duration of my life? You are for eternities of eternities, the duration of endless years; and behold, I am going to deface all I have done: this earth will become water, an inundation as it was in the beginning. I will remain with Osiris, and I will make my form like another serpent, whom no man will know, and no God will see. It is good what I have done to Osiris, who is exalted above all the Gods. I have given him power in the region of the Netherworld, and his son Horus will inherit his throne in the Isle of Fire. I will make his throne in the boat of millions of years. Horus is well established on his seat to take possession of his place of rest; also, I send a soul to Sut in the West, who is exalted above all Gods; and I have caused his soul to be guarded in the boat, so that he may feel reverential fear of the divine body (Osiris).] O my father Osiris! I have done for you what your father Ra did for you. Let me have increase upon earth, let me keep my dwelling place, let my heir be vigorous, let my sepulchre flourish, and my dependents upon earth. Let all my adversaries be crushed to pieces with Selk'et (the scorpion Goddess) over their ruin. I am your son, O my father Ra! You have been the cause of this Life, Health, and Strength. Horus is established upon his throne. Grant that my duration of life may be that of one who attains beatitude. (3) Notes: The translation and notes of this chapter, except what is in brackets, are Renouf's work. They are taken from the introduction he published to his edition of the papyrus of Ani (p. 16). The vignette shows the deceased and his wife worshipping Thoth. This chapter is found in the papyrus of Ani and at greater length in a papyrus of the Museum of Leyden, from which it has been copied by Naville into his edition. The Leyden text is unfortunately very incomplete, both in the upper and lower parts of the columns. The two texts differ materially in some of their readings and will require considerable study before a satisfactory translation can be given. 1. The deceased is evidently supposed to be just arrived in a place of utter darkness and desolation and expresses his feelings of distress to Thoth in the opening address. 2. The text of Leyden is much more complete. Owing probably to want of space, the scribe of Ani has shortened his text. There the omissions are so considerable that it is impossible to find a sense. I have often adopted the reading of the Leyden papyrus in the translation of this part of the chapter. 3. The remaining columns in the Leyden text are unfortunately incomplete."The manuscript, although incomplete, shows that the deceased is reborn as Osiris through his son Horus. There is a cry of adoration to him in Sutenhenen, and joy in En-aaref. The Gods are pleased to see him inherit his throne and rule the earth. Sut is terrified by the transformation. All generations of mankind, past, present, and future, show respect. The chapter mentions the "Hoeing" and the bloodshed in Sutenhenen, referencing the myth of mankind's destruction, and other details about Osiris. This chapter is recited over an image of Horus made of lapis lazuli placed at the deceased's throat and also in the Netherworld.

Chapter CLXXVI: Not dying a second time in the Netherworld. I reject the land of the East. I avoid the dungeon because I haven't committed the forbidden acts. I have passed through the purification place in Meskat; the inviolate God has given me his glorious attributes on the day the two Earths united before the Master of all things. Knowing this chapter makes one powerful in the Netherworld.

Chapter CLXXVII: Raising the Chu and vivifying his soul in the Netherworld. O Nut, who created the father from his earth and Horus after him, who bound his wings like a hawk and perfected his words, who showed him his abode among the stars. He is the great star of Nut. You see N. speaking to the Glorified, for he is the great form who will not rule if you are not among them. You see N.'s head as a ba (ram); his horns are like those of a sacrificed black ram. Horus with blue eyes guards Horus with red eyes in his sickness and wrath. Let his soul not be opposed, let his messengers come to him quickly. The God says: your words are those of the father of the Gods, your name will be triumphant before the Gods; they exalt you and the cycle of the Gods give you their hands. The God tells the father of the Gods: take possession of the door of the ka on the horizon, let them open their gates; you are welcome, prevail over them, let them advance towards the God. When they come out, they raise their faces and see him before the great God Amsu. Your head will not perish, and what you have done before men and Gods will not be destroyed.

Chapter CLXXVIII: Raising the body, giving it eyes, ears, and fixing its head. You have received the eye of Horus; your table is a table of offerings. Hail, Hunnu, purify your body; they have eaten the eye of Horus, the olive of Heliopolis, and destroy what is wrong in Osiris's body. N.'s mouth was thirsty, but he will never hunger or thirst again; Chas delivers him from hunger. O you who fill the vases, chiefs who distribute bread and cakes, and manage the waterflood; Ra ordered bread and beer for N. They seize the gifts and give him wheat, barley, and loaves, for he is the great bull. Grant N. the charge of the five loaves in the funerary chapel; three in heaven for Ra, two on earth for the Gods, and Nu sees them. O Ra, be gracious to N. on this happy day when N. joined Shu and Isis. They give bread and beer to N. and do all good and pure things on this happy day, bringing him the eye of Horus whenever he arrives to see the God. You take possession of water and march towards the altar of Sashert: four measures of water, as commanded by Osiris to N. Shu has handed over his wealth to N.; they are your bread and beer. Awake, lofty judge; awake, sleeper; your offerings are brought before Thoth and Horus, who comes from the Nile, and Apuat from Asert. N.'s mouth is pure, and his tongue in his mouth, for N. hates filth and is washed from impurity like Sut in the city of Rehui. Feed N. with you; let him eat, drink, sit, and be mighty as you are. Navigate as you navigate. N.'s tent is woven in the field of Aarru, his running water is in the Garden of Hotepit. Offerings are made to him among the Gods; N.'s drink is the wine of Ra. He goes around the sky like Ra, travels over the sky like Thoth. N. rejects hunger and thirst. N. has received bread from the lord of eternity. He ordered that N. be conceived at night and born in the morning, close to Ra's follower, before the morning star. N. was conceived and born of N., bringing you the loaves found in the eye of Horus, on the tennu tree bough. When he came, Khenta Amenta brought him the victuals and offerings of Horus in his abodes. N. lives of them; as Horus drinks, N. drinks; his food is on the altar of Sashert. N. is welcome to Anubis on his mountain. Hail, N., your figure is as it was on earth, living and renewed every day. Your face is unveiled, and you see the lord of the horizon; he gives bread to N. at his hour of the day and at his appointed time in the night. Horus has avenged you. He has smashed the jawbones of your enemies and smitten the violent one at the door of his fortress. Hail, N., your enemies are no more, the scales are right concerning you in the great hall, you make long strides like Osiris, the lord of arrivals in Amenta. He arrives when he likes, sees the great God in his creations, and life is given to his nostrils. He is triumphant over his enemies. Hail, N. You hate falsehood, propitiate the lord of all things in the night of "stopping the tears," and receive sweet life from the mouth of the Gods. Thoth is satisfied in giving you victory over your enemies. Nut spreads her wings over you in her name of the veil of the sky, giving you to follow the great God, and your enemies are no more. She delivers you from all evil in her name of Chnumeturit, for she is the great one among her children. O chief of the hours, in front of Ra, make way for N. to arrive in the circle of Osiris, the living lord of the two earths, who lives eternally. N. follows Nefertmu, he is the lotus at Ra's nostrils, pure in the presence of the Gods; he sees Ra eternally.

Chapter CLXXIX: Coming forth when going out of yesterday and coming in the present day, equipped by one's own hands. I am raised from yesterday, I come today, I co...Chapter CLXXIX: Emerging from the past and entering the present, empowered by one's own actions. I rise from yesterday and step into today. I am the essence flowing from the tree, the life force emerging from its form. I stand before the lord of the white crown, gracious and confident. My words are firm before the lord of the red crown, who restores his eye. Though I died yesterday, I am reborn today. I approach the doorkeeper of the great God, emerging victorious against my enemy. He is delivered to me, unable to escape my grasp, diminishing in my possession before the great circle of Gods in the Netherworld. I wear the diadem of the great Goddess, symbolizing my authority among the living Gods. My enemy is subdued, unable to escape, dwindling in my possession before the Gods of Osiris during his festival. I am the master of the sword, and it will not be taken from me. I rest in the garden of Hotepit, as commanded by the lords of Cheraba, standing tall among the mighty. I am strong, resting in the isles of the garden of Aarru.

Chapter CLXXX: Emerging by day, praising Ra in the Amenta, honoring the inhabitants of the Tuat, and opening the way for the mighty soul in the Netherworld. Ra sets as Osiris, resplendent among the Glorified and the Gods of the Amenta. He is the one, the marvelous in the Tuat, the exalted soul in the Netherworld, Unneferu, eternal and everlasting. Hail to you in the Tuat, where your son Horus rests within you. You speak to him, granting him radiance before the inhabitants of the Tuat, making him the great star. He brings his essence to the Tuat, traveling within it as the son of Ra, born from Tmu. Hail to you in the Tuat, God seated on your throne, holding your scepter, king of the Tuat, and lord of Acherta. Great prince wearing the double diadem, great God who conceals his dwelling, lord of wisdom, chief of his circle of Gods. Hail to you in the Tuat, praises to all within you. The weeping Gods honor you, clapping their hands, imploring, and praying before you. Your soul rejoices, and your body is glorious, exalted in the Amenta. The powers praise you within the bounds of the Tuat, Teb Temt resting in his covering. Hail, Osiris, I am your temple servant, dwelling in your divine abode. You speak to me, granting me radiance before the inhabitants of the Tuat, like the great star who brings his essence to the Tuat, traveling within it as the son of Ra, born from Tmu. I rest in the Tuat, master of the dusk, entering and exiting freely. The arms of Tatunen receive me, the blessed lift me up. Stretch your arms towards me, for I know your gates. Guide me, praise me, rejoice in me as in Ra, for I have placed offerings before you, and you take possession of your sustenance as Ra commanded. I am his favorite, his heir on earth. I have arrived. Blessed ones, grant me entry to the Tuat, open the entrance to the good Amenta. I have presented the sceptre to saJm, and the ne/iu/ies to him whose name is hidden. Look at me, blessed ones, divine guides in the Tuat. Grant me your glory, that I may shine like the God of mysteries. Deliver me from the Gods of the pillory, who bind to their posts. Do not bind me, do not send me to the place of destruction. I am the heir of Osiris, receiving the nemines in the Tuat. Look at me, I shine like one of you, becoming like him who praises his father and extols him. Look at me, rejoice in me, grant me exaltation, that I may become like him who destroys his forms. Open the way for my soul, set me on your pedestals. Grant me rest in the good Amenta, show me my dwelling among you, open your ways, unfasten the bolts. O Ra, who guides this earth, guiding the powers and following the course of the Gods. I am the guardian of his door, towing the navigating Gods. I am the only one, the guardian of his door, placing the Gods in their abodes. I am on my pedestal in the Tuat, a possessor among possessors, at the far end of the Tuat. I am blessed in the Acherta, making my resting place in the Amenta, among the powers and Gods. I am Ra's favorite, the mysterious Bennu entering and exiting the Tuat in peace. I am the lord of the thrones above, traversing the horizon with Ra. My offerings are in the sky in the field of Ra, and my portion on earth in the garden of Aarru. I journey in the Tuat like Ra, weighing words like Thoth, marching as I will, hastening like Sahu the mysterious one, born as the two Gods. I am the chief bearer of offerings to the Gods of the Tuat, giving offerings to the Glorified. I am the brave one who strikes his enemies. O Gods, O Glorified who precede Ra, escorting his soul, tow me as you tow him, guiding me as you guide Ra and those in the sky. I am the lofty power in the Amenta.

Chapter CLXXXI: Arriving before the Divine circle of Osiris and the Gods, the guides in the Tuat, the guards of their halls, the heralds of their gates, and the doorkeepers of their pylons in the Amenta. Taking the form of a living soul and praising Osiris, the lord of his circle of Gods. Hail to you, Chenta Amenta, Unneferu, lord of Tatsert. You shine like Ra, who comes to see you, rejoicing in your beauty. His disk is your disk, his rays are your rays, his diadem is your diadem, his height is your height, his splendor is your splendor, his beauty is your beauty, his might is your might, his scent is your scent. His width is your width, his abode is your abode, his throne is your throne, his lineage is your lineage, his judgment is your judgment, his Ament is your Ament, his wealth is your wealth, his duration is your duration, his creations are your creations. As he is, so are you. As you are, so is he. He shall not die, and neither will you. If he does not triumph over his enemies, neither will you. No evil will befall him, and none will befall you, forever and ever. Hail, Osiris, son of Nut, lord of horns, wearing the high atef crown, to whom the diadem and the hik scepter have been given in the presence of the cycle of the Gods. Turn has instilled fear of his might in the hearts of mankind, Gods, the Glorified, and the dead. Royal power has been granted to him in Heliopolis. He is the great one.Osiris, the lord of fear in his two abodes, is revered in Restau and celebrated in Abydos. He triumphs before all Gods, his power felt across the earth. The great ones stand before him, the prince of the Gods of the Tuat, the mighty sky lord, and king of the living and the dead. Thousands glorify him in Cheraba, and the future ones rejoice in him. He receives the best offerings in Memphis, and his festival is celebrated in Sechem. Horus, his son, avenges him, restoring his body and joining his bones. Osiris rises, protected by the Gods, with Nut and his sisters, Isis and Nephthys, filling him with life and strength. The Gods gather good things for him, praising him forever. Osiris shines brilliantly, powerful and glorified, like Anubis. Ra rejoices in his beauty, and Seb grants his desires in the Amenta. Osiris navigates the sky daily, leading Ra to Nut, living in the Amenta. He is with Horus, protected by Ra and Thoth, with Isis's health within him. 

I come to you, Osiris, lord of Ta-tsert, eternal Unneferu. My heart is pure, and I bring offerings to you. I have struck down your enemies and purified myself for your festival. I have prepared offerings for your soul and the Gods who follow you. Knowing this book protects one from evil, granting entry to the Tuat and receiving good things before its inhabitants.

Chapter CLXXXII: Thoth, the perfect scribe, repels Osiris's enemies, ensuring the morning light shines on him daily. Thoth, the lord of laws, dispels darkness and gives Osiris the breath of life. He ensures Ra and Osiris set and rise together, reviving Osiris's heart. Thoth, the great magician, pacifies the two earths and gives life to the future ones. Osiris triumphs over his enemies, protected by Thoth's amulet. Thoth, the high God, opens the good roads and praises Osiris Unneferu, eternal and everlasting.

Chapter CLXXXIII: Adoration to Osiris, praising Unneferu, and exalting the lord of Ta-tsert. Thoth brings sweet breezes and the breath of life to Osiris, illuminating his path and removing wrongs. He appeases the Gods and makes the two earths peaceful. Horus, Osiris's son, triumphs before all Gods, receiving royal power and dominion over the earth. The throne of Seb and the high dignity of Tmu are his. Osiris joins the firmament, bringing forth growth on mountains and earth. He hands over all Gods to Horus, who commands them at his gates.Osiris, the lord of fear in his two abodes, is revered in Restau and celebrated in Abydos. He triumphs before all Gods, his power felt across the earth. The great ones stand before him, the prince of the Gods of the Tuat, the mighty sky lord, and king of the living and the dead. Thousands glorify him in Cheraba, and the future ones rejoice in him. He receives the best offerings in Memphis, and his festival is celebrated in Sechem. Horus, his son, avenges him, restoring his body and joining his bones. Osiris rises, protected by the Gods, with Nut and his sisters, Isis and Nephthys, filling him with life and strength. The Gods gather good things for him, praising him forever. Osiris shines brilliantly, powerful and glorified, like Anubis. Ra rejoices in his beauty, and Seb grants his desires in the Amenta. Osiris navigates the sky daily, leading Ra to Nut, living in the Amenta. He is with Horus, protected by Ra and Thoth, with Isis's health within him.

I come to you, Osiris, lord of Ta-tsert, eternal Unneferu. My heart is pure, and I bring offerings to you. I have struck down your enemies and purified myself for your festival. I have prepared offerings for your soul and the Gods who follow you. Knowing this book protects one from evil, granting entry to the Tuat and receiving good things before its inhabitants.

Chapter CLXXXII: Thoth, the perfect scribe, repels Osiris's enemies, ensuring the morning light shines on him daily. Thoth, the lord of laws, dispels darkness and gives Osiris the breath of life. He ensures Ra and Osiris set and rise together, reviving Osiris's heart. Thoth, the great magician, pacifies the two earths and gives life to the future ones. Osiris triumphs over his enemies, protected by Thoth's amulet. Thoth, the high God, opens the good roads and praises Osiris Unneferu, eternal and everlasting.

Chapter CLXXXIII: Adoration to Osiris, praising Unneferu, and exalting the lord of Ta-tsert. Thoth brings sweet breezes and the breath of life to Osiris, illuminating his path and removing wrongs. He appeases the Gods and makes the two earths peaceful. Horus, Osiris's son, triumphs before all Gods, receiving royal power and dominion over the earth. The throne of Seb and the high dignity of Tmu are his. Osiris joins the firmament, bringing forth growth on mountains and earth. He hands over all Gods to Horus, who commands them at his gates.

He has commanded, and they fulfill it at once; your heart is satisfied, lord of the Gods, and overjoyed. Egypt and the desert are at peace; they are the vassals of your royal diadem. The temples and cities are well-ordered; they bring you tributes and make libations to your name forever. You are called upon, and your name is praised; your ka is gratified by funerary meals. The Glorified who follow you sprinkle water on your food beside the dead souls in this land. All your thoughts are excellent like those of the one who was at the beginning. Be crowned, son of Nut, as the Inviolate God is crowned; you are living, revived, renewed, and perfect. Your father Ra gives health to all your limbs, and your divine circle praises you. Isis is with you, she will never leave you until all your enemies are struck down. All lands praise your beauties like Ra when he rises every morning; you are crowned like him who is high on his pedestal, your beauties are exalted, your strides lengthened. You have received the royal power of Seb, your father who creates your beauties; your mother gave existence to your limbs, Nut who bore the Gods bore you to be the chief of the five Gods. The white crown of the South is placed on your head; you seize the hook and the flail. When you were still in the womb, before you appeared on earth, you were crowned to be lord of the two earths, the crown of Ra was on your head. The Gods come to you, bowing down, the fear of you possesses them; they see you with the might of Ra, and the valor of your majesty fills their hearts. Life is with you, abundance is attached to you. I offer Maat before you: grant that I may be in the train of your majesty like one who is on the earth. May your name be called upon, may it be found among the just ones. I have come to the city of this God, to the city of God, to the region of old time; my soul, my heart, my spirit are in this land. The God of it is the lord of justice, the lord of abundance, the great and venerable one, who is towed through the whole earth; he journeys to the South in his boat, and to the North driven by the winds, and his oars, to be entertained with gifts according to the command of the God, the lord of peace therein, who left me free of care. The God therein rejoices in him who practices justice; he grants an old age to him who has done so; he is beloved, and the end of it is a good burial and a sepulture in Ta-tsert. I have come to you: my hands bring Maat, my heart does not contain any falsehood, I offer you Maat before your face, I know her; I swear by her: I have done no evil thing on earth; I have never wronged a man of his property. I am Thoth, the perfect and pure writer: my hands are pure. I have put away all evil things: I write justice and I hate evil: for I am the writing-reed of the Inviolate God, who utters his words, and whose words are written in the two earths. I am Thoth, the lord of justice, who gives victory to him who is injured and who takes the defense of the oppressed, of him who is wronged in his property. I have dispelled darkness; I have driven away the storm; I have given air to Unneferu, and the sweet breezes of the North when he comes out of the womb of his mother. I have given him to enter into the mysterious cave where the heart of the God whose heart is motionless is revived, Unneferu, the son of Nut, the victorious.

Note: This hymn is taken from the papyrus of Unneferu, in London. See note 1 in Chapter 1.

Chapter CLXXXV: Giving praise to Osiris, falling on the earth before the lord of eternity; propitiating the God with what he loves, speaking the truth, the lord of which is not known. Hail to you, venerable God, great and beneficent prince of eternity, in his abode in the Sektit boat. Acclamations are given to him in the sky and on earth; he is exalted by the past and present. Great is the fear he inspires in the hearts of men, of the Glorified and of the dead. His soul was given to him in Tattu, his might in Heracleopolis, his image in Heliopolis, and his power over forms in the double sanctuary. I have come to you; my heart holds right, my heart contains no falsehood. Give me to be among the living, to navigate up and down in your train.

Chapter CLXXXVI: Adoration to Hathor, the lady of the West, falling down before Mehurit. I have come to you, to see your beauties, give me to be at the head of your followers and among your divine attendants. Many papyri end with a picture representing Hathor of the West, in the company of the Goddess Thueris coming out of the mountain where the burial is to take place. The text, which is generally very corrupt, as if the writer had neglected the words for the picture, is an adoration to Hathor, which varies in its form. The text here translated is taken from a papyrus at Leyden.